Dr Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud, J 1 This appeal arises from a judgment of a Division Bench of the Madurai Bench of the Madras High Court dated 1 June 2017. In an appeal arising from a decision of the Deputy Commissioner for Employee‘s Compensation, the High Court enhanced the compensation payable under the Employee‘s Compensation Act 1923 1 from Rs 4,33,060 to Rs 8,86,120. The High Court has awarded interest at the rate of 12% per annum from the date of the accident.

Signature Not Verified In the present proceedings which have been instituted under Article 136 of the Digitally signed by SANJAY KUMAR Date: 2020.02.13 Constitution, notice was issued on 26 July 2019. Since the appellants were 12:36:17 IST Reason:

―1923 Act‖ represented by the first appellant in person, this Court, by its order dated 26 July 2019, directed that an amicus curiae be nominated by the Supreme Court Legal Services Committee. Accordingly, Mr S Mahendran, learned counsel, has been nominated as the amicus curiae, whom we have heard in support of the appeal. 3 The appellants are the father, mother, sister and brother of Dinesh Kumar, who died in the course of an accident on 31 January 2008. On the date of the incident, the deceased was 26 years of age and was engaged as a driver of a trailor lorry. While the vehicle was being driven on NH 12 in Kota, Rajasthan, a truck bearing registration No MH 19 Z 1696 came from the opposite direction and dashed against the trailor, resulting in the death of Dinesh Kumar. At the time of the accident, the deceased was in the employment of the first respondent. A claim under the 1923 Act was lodged before the Deputy Commissioner for Employee‘s Compensation, Madurai on 29 April 2013. On 26 March 2014, the claim was allowed by an award in the amount of Rs 4,33,060. The Deputy Commissioner had proceeded ex parte. The appellants filed an appeal2 before the Madras High Court for enhancement of the compensation. 4 The High Court, by its judgment dated 23 November 2015, remanded the proceedings to the Deputy Commissioner for determination afresh. While remanding the proceedings, the High Court noted that though the appellants had filed a salary certificate as Exhibit P5 to establish that the monthly income of the deceased was Rs 32,000, no witness was examined on behalf of the employer to prove the salary certificate. However, acceding to the request of the appellants that they should be furnished with an opportunity to examine the employer‘s witness in support of Exhibit CMA (MD) 344 of 2014 P5, the High Court considered it in the interests of justice to remand the proceedings. 5 On remand, the Commissioner for Workmen‘s Compensation, Madurai, by an order dated 4 March 2016, maintained the award of compensation in the amount of Rs 4,33,060. Before the Commissioner, on remand, the appellants examined PW2, the owner of the vehicle which was being driven by the deceased. During the course of his evidence, he stated as follows:

―I am the 1st respondent in this case under W.C. Case No.74/2011 is under tail in this court is known to me. I received summons 3 times from the court. For the last two summons, as my own lorries were working in the other states and I also have to go there, I was unable to come and adduce witness for the court summon. The accident platform trailor lorry TN 28 AB 1933 belongs to Sathishkumar. The deceased Dinesh Kumar S/o Sivaraman worked as a driver.
In 2008, (31.1.2008) when going to Pandicheri to Rajasthan Sironi before Kotta town the opposite coming tarras lorry dashed face to face and caused accident. As soon as the accident occurred in the same occurrence place Dineshkumar died. Before accident he worked for about 3 years. He was having proper driving license. He was having license for driving heavy vehicles. The Ex.P.5 monthly pay certificate was issued by me. In it, for deceased Dinesh Kumar I was paying Rs 32,000 per month (including food expenses) but pay of Rs 25,000. The vehicle involved in the accident has been properly insured with 2nd respondent company of M/s Reliance General Insurance Company. At the time of accident, the insurance was in current.‖ 6 The Commissioner, however, proceeded on the basis that in terms of the notification issued under Section 4(1B) of the 1923 Act, whatever be the monthly pay received by a person, the jurisdiction of the adjudicating authority was subject to a ceiling of Rs 4,000 per month in computing the monthly wages of the employee. Taking the monthly salary at Rs 4,000, the Commissioner applied a multiplicand of 215.28 in terms of Schedule IV (the deceased being 26 years of age) and arrived at a figure of Rs 4,30,560 to which an additional amount of Rs 2,500 was added towards funeral expenses. A total award in the amount of Rs 4,33,060 was decreed as the compensation payable to the appellants.

7 In an appeal filed before the High Court, the Division Bench took note of the fact that in pursuance of the order of remand, the salary of deceased employee had been proved to be Rs 32,000 per month. The High Court noticed that though the accident had taken place on 31 January 2008, the petition for compensation had been lodged on 28 January 2011 and was decided by the Commissioner on 4 March 2016. 8 In the meantime, a notification was issued by the Central Government on 31 May 2010 in the following terms:

―S.O.1258(E) – In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-
section (1B) of Section 4 of the Employee's Compensation Act, 1923, (g of 1923), the Central Government hereby specified, for the purpose of Sub-Section (1) of the said section, the following amount as monthly wages, with effect from the date of publication of this notification in the official gazette, namely – Eight thousand rupees.‖ 9 The High Court was of the view that having due regard to the fact that the legislation in question is a social welfare legislation, the enhanced income of Rs 8,000 per month should form the basis of the computation. Thus, applying the multiplicand in terms of Schedule IV, the High Court enhanced the compensation to Rs 8,86,120. 10 In appeal before this Court, the learned amicus curiae urged that both the Commissioner and the High Court have erred - the Commissioner having adopted a figure of Rs 4,000 per month and the High Court, Rs 8,000 per month. The learned amicus curiae submitted that in terms of the provisions of Section 4(1)(a) of the 1923 Act, where death has resulted from injury, the compensation payable is an amount equal to fifty per cent of the monthly wages of the deceased employee multiplied by the relevant factor. The relevant factor is specified in Schedule IV and for the deceased who was 26 years old on the date of the accident, the multiplicand would be 215.28. The learned amicus curiae submitted that under sub-section (1B) of Section 4, the Central Government is empowered to issue a notification specifying, for the purposes of sub-section (1), the monthly wages in relation to an employee as it may consider necessary. However, it was submitted that the notification does not impose a cap or ceiling on the monthly wages which form the basis of calculating the compensation due and payable. Where the actual wages of an employee are proved to be in excess of the amount which is specified in the notification, there is no bar in adopting the monthly wages so proved in terms of Section 4(1)(a). The learned counsel buttressed this submission by adverting to Act 45 of 2009, which took effect from 18 January 2010 and deleted the deeming provision in Explanation II to Section

43. Moreover, it was urged by the learned amicus curiae that the method of calculating wages is specified in Section 5. It was urged that clause (a) of Section 5 will be attracted to the present case where the employee was, during a continuous period of not less than twelve months immediately preceding the accident, in the service of the employer.

11 The learned amicus curiae, at a belated stage, sought to distinguish the judgments of this Court in Pratap Narain Singh Deo v Srinivas Sabata4 (―Pratap ―Explanation II – Where the monthly wages of a workman exceed four thousand rupees, his monthly wages for the purposes of clause(a) and clause(b) shall be deemed to be four thousand rupees only.‖ (1976) 1 SCC 289 Narain Singh‖) and Kerala State Electricity Board v Valsala K5 (―Valsala‖) in which it was held that the date relevant for the determination of compensation payable under the 1923 Act is the date of the accident and that the benefit of an amendment enhancing the amount of compensation shall not apply to accidents that take place prior to its coming into force. To support this, the amicus curiae relied on the judgments of this Court in New India Assurance Company Ltd. v Neelakandan (―Neelakandan‖),6 and National Insurance Co Ltd. v Mubasir Ahmed7 (―Mubasir Ahmed‖).

12 Section 4(1)(a) of the Act contains the following provision:

―4. Amount of compensation.—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the amount of compensation shall be as follows, namely:—
(a) where death results an amount equal to fifty per cent of the monthly wages of the deceased from the injury employee multiplied by the relevant factor;
or an amount of one lakh and twenty thousand rupees, whichever is more;‖ 13 The proviso to the above provision stipulates that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, from time to time, enhance the amount of compensation mentioned in clauses (a) and (b). Clause (b) deals with a case involving permanent total disablement resulting from the injury. The expression ―relevant factor‖ is defined in Explanation I to be the factor specified in Schedule IV. Prior to Act 45 of (1999) 8 SCC 254 Civil Appeal Nos. 16904-09 of 1996 (2007) 2 SCC 349 2009, Section 4 contained Explanation II, which was in the following terms:
―Explanation II – Where the monthly wages of a workman exceed four thousand rupees, his monthly wages for the purposes of clause(a) and clause(b) shall be deemed to be four thousand rupees only.‖ 14 By Act 45 of 2009, which came into force on 18 January 2010, Explanation II came to be deleted. Sub-section (1B) was introduced in Section 4 to read as follows:
―(1-B) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify, for the purposes of sub-section (1), such monthly wages in relation to an employee as it may consider necessary.‖ 15 The question before this Court is whether the benefit of Act 45 of 2009 deleting the deeming provision in Explanation II which capped the monthly wages of an employee at Rs 4,000 would also apply to accidents which took place prior to the coming into force of its provisions i.e. 18 January 2010 and where final adjudication is pending. In assessing whether the Act 45 of 2009 applies retrospectively, it is necessary to analyze the relevant precedents of this Court. In Pratap Narain Singh, the first respondent was in the employment of the appellant and suffered injuries which arose out of and in the course of employment. It was contended that the Commissioner committed an error of law in imposing a penalty on the appellant under Section 4A(3) of the 1923 Act as the compensation payable had not fallen due until it was ‗settled‘ by the Commissioner under Section 19 of the 1923 Act. Section 4A reads:
―4A. Compensation to be paid when due and penalty for default.- (1) Compensation under section 4 shall be paid as soon as it falls due.
(2) In cases where the employer does not accept the liability for compensation to the extent claimed, he shall be bound to make provisional payment based on the extent of liability which he accepts, and, such payment shall be deposited with the Commissioner or made to the  employee, as the case may be, without prejudice to the right of the employee to make any further claim.
(3) Where any employer is in default in paying the compensation due under the Act within one month from the date it fell due, the Commissioner shall –

(a) Direct that the employer shall, in addition to the amount of the arrears, pay simple interest thereon at the rate of twelve percent per annum or at such higher rate not exceeding the maximum of the lending rates of any scheduled bank as may be specified by the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, on the amount due; and

(b) If, in his opinion, there is no justification for the delay, direct that the employer shall, in addition to the amount of arrears and interest thereon, pay a further sum not exceeding fifty per cent of such amount by way of penalty…‖ 16 In terms of Section 4A(1), compensation under Section 4 is payable ―as soon as it falls due.‖ Section 4A(2) contemplates a situation wherein the employer, though accepting the liability to pay compensation to the injured employee, disputes the quantum of compensation payable. In such cases, sub-section (2) enjoins the employer to make a provisional payment based on the extent of accepted liability by depositing it with the Commissioner or by paying it directly to the employee. Section 4A(3) stipulates that where an employer defaults in paying compensation within one month from the date on which it falls due, the Commissioner is empowered to direct the payment of interest as well as an additional amount as arrears for an unjustifiable delay in making payment. Section 19 of the Act reads:

―19. Reference to Commissioners.- (1) If any question arises in any proceedings under this Act as to the liability of any person to pay compensation (including any question as to whether a person injured is or is not an employee or as to the amount or duration of compensation (including any question as to the nature or extent of disablement), the question shall, in default of agreement be settled by a Commissioner…‖ 17 Section 19 stipulates that any question arising in any proceeding under the Act shall, in the default of an agreement, be settled by the Commissioner. A four judge Bench of this Court rejected the contention urged by the appellant and held that compensation ―falls due‖ on the date of the accident. Consequently, the Commissioner was empowered to impose interest or penalty for the duration prior to the settling of the claim or where there was unjustified delay in making good the payment of compensation. The Court held:
―18…The employer therefore became liable to pay the compensation as soon as the aforesaid personal injury was caused to the workman by the accident which admittedly arose out of and in the course of the employment. It is therefore futile to contend that the compensation did not fall due with after the Commissioner's order dated May 6, 1969 under section 19. What the section provides is that if any question arises in any proceeding under the Act as to the liability of any person to pay compensation or as to the amount or duration of the compensation it shall, in default of an agreement, be settled by the Commissioner. There is therefore nothing to justify the argument that the employer's liability to pay compensation under section 3, in respect of the injury, was suspended until after the settlement contemplated by section…
19. The appellant was thus liable to pay compensation as soon as the aforesaid personal injury was caused to the appellant, and there is no justification for the argument to the contrary. It was the duty of the appellant, under section 4A(1) of the Act, to pay the compensation at the rate provided by section 4 as soon as the personal injury was caused to the respondent. He failed to do so. What is worse, he did not even make a provisional payment under sub-section (2) of section 4 for, as has been stated, he went to the extent of taking the false pleas that the respondent was a casual contractor and that the accident occurred solely because of his negligence. Then there is the further fact that he paid no heed to the respondent's personal approach for obtaining the compensation. It will be recalled that the respondent was driven to the necessity of making and application to the Commissioner for settling the claim, and even there the appellant raised a frivolous objection as to the jurisdiction of the Commissioner and prevailed on the respondent to file a memorandum of agreement setting the claim for a sum which was so grossly inadequate that it was rejected by the Commissioner. In these facts and circumstances, we have no doubt that the Commissioner was fully justified in making an order for the payment of interest and the penalty.‖ 18 The Court held that though Section 19 empowered the Commissioner to decide claims or objections under the Act, the obligation to pay compensation to an injured employee was not suspended until the Commissioner settled the amount payable in the case of a dispute between the employer and the employee. Section 4A deals with when the obligation for the payment of compensation as required under the 1923 Act arises. For the purposes of Section 4A of the 1923 Act, the obligation to pay compensation arises on the date of the accident. Where an employer disputes the quantum of compensation payable, it is enjoined to make a provisional payment to the Commissioner or the employee pending the settlement of the claim. This is in order to ensure that an employer does not escape its obligation to make good the payment of compensation or unduly delay its payment on frivolous grounds.