Deepak Gupta, J.

1. Kajal was a bright young girl. She used to attend school, play with her friends and lead a normal life like any other child. Unfortunately, on 18th October, 2007, while Kajal was travelling on a tractor with her parents, the tractor was hit by a truck which was driven rashly. In the said accident, Kajal suffered serious injuries resulting in damage to her brain. This has had Signature Not Verified very serious consequences on her. She was examined at the Post Digitally signed by CHARANJEET KAUR Date: 2020.02.05 16:55:13 IST Reason:

Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh (PGI, Chandigarh for short), for assessment of her disability. According to the said report, because of head injury Kajal is left with a very low I.Q. and severe weakness in all her four limbs, suffers from severe hysteria and severe urinary incontinence. Her disability has been assessed as 100%.

2. Dr. Chhabra (PW­4), who was one of the members of the Board which issued the disability certificate (Ex.P6) stated that as per the assessment her I.Q. is less than 20% of a child of her age and her social age is only of a 9 month old child. This means that Kajal while lying on the bed will grow up to be an adult with all the physical and biological attributes which a woman would get on attaining adulthood, including menstruation etc., but her mind will remain of a 9 month old child. Basically, she will not understand what is happening all around her.

3. How does one assess compensation in such a case? No amount of money can compensate this child for the injuries suffered by her. She can never be put back in the same position. However, compensation has to be determined in terms of the provisions of Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (for short the Act). The Act requires determination of payment of just compensation and it is the duty of the court to ensure that she is paid compensation which is just.

4. Kajal through her father filed a claim petition, under the Act. The Motor Accident Claims Tribunal (MACT for short) awarded Rs.11,08,501/­ and held that since there was violation of the terms of policy the insurance company would pay the amount but would be entitled to recover the same from the owner. The High Court enhanced the award amount to Rs.25,78,501/­ under the following heads:

         Heads                                   High Court

         Multiplier                              ­
         Income (taken to be)                    Rs. 15,000/­
         Disability                              100%
         Loss of income and permanent            Rs. 2,70,000/­
         disability compensation
         Pain, suffering loss of amenities       Rs. 3,00,000/­
         Attendant charges                       Rs. 3,20,000/­
                                                 (Rs.2500 for 44
                                                 years)
         Future medical expenses                 Rs. 2,00,000/­
         Loss of marriage prospects              Rs. 3,00,000/­
         Medical                                 Rs. 1,38,501/­
         Treatment
Transportation details / special diet Rs. 50,000/­ Total Rs.25,78,501/­ Aggrieved by the award the claimant is before this Court.

5. The principles with regard to determination of just compensation contemplated under the Act are well settled. Injuries cause deprivation to the body which entitles the claimant to claim damages. The damages may vary according to the gravity of the injuries sustained by the claimant in an accident. On account of the injuries, the claimant may suffer consequential losses such as (i) loss of earning; (ii) expenses on treatment which may include medical expenses, transportation, special diet, attendant charges etc., (iii) loss or diminution to the pleasures of life by loss of a particular part of the body, and (iv) loss of future earning capacity. Damages can be pecuniary as well as non­ pecuniary, but all have to be assessed in Rupees and Paise.

6. It is impossible to equate human suffering and personal deprivation with money. However, this is what the Act enjoins upon the courts to do. The court has to make a judicious attempt to award damages, so as to compensate the claimant for the loss suffered by the victim. On the one hand, the compensation should not be assessed very conservatively, but on the other hand, compensation should also not be assessed in so liberal a fashion so as to make it a bounty to the claimant. The court while assessing the compensation should have regard to the degree of deprivation and the loss caused by such deprivation. Such compensation is what is termed as just compensation. The compensation or damages assessed for personal injuries should be substantial to compensate the injured for the deprivation suffered by the injured throughout his/her life. They should not be just token damages.

7. There are numerous cases where the principles for grant of compensation have been enunciated. It would be relevant to quote pertinent observations from a few.

8. In Phillips v. Western Railway Co.1, Field, J., while emphasizing that damages must be full and adequate, held thus:

"You cannot put the plaintiff back again into his original position, but you must bring your reasonable common sense to bear, and you must always recollect that this is the only occasion on which compensation can be given. The plaintiff can never sue again for it. You have, therefore, now to give him compensation once and for all. He has done no wrong, he has suffered a wrong at the hands of the defendants and you must take care to give him full fair compensation for that which he has suffered." Besides, the Tribunals should always remember that the measures of damages in all these cases "should be such as to enable even a tortfeasor to say that he had amply atoned for his misadventure".
9. In the case of Mediana2, Lord Halsbury held:

"Of course the whole region of inquiry into damages is one of extreme difficulty. You very often cannot even lay down any principle upon which you can give damages;
nevertheless, it is remitted to the jury, or those who stand in place of the jury, to consider what compensation in money shall be given for what is a wrongful act. Take the most familiar and ordinary case: how is anybody to measure pain and suffering in moneys counted? Nobody 1 (1874) 4 QBD 406 2 [1900] AC 113  can suggest that you can by any arithmetical calculation establish what is the exact amount of money which would represent such a thing as the pain and suffering which a person has undergone by reason of an accident. In truth, I think it would be very arguable to say that a person would be entitled to no damages for such thing. What manly mind cares about pain and suffering that is past? But, nevertheless, the law recognizes that as a topic upon which damages may be given."

10. The following observations of Lord Morris in his speech in H. West & Son Ltd. v. Shephard3, are very pertinent:

"Money may be awarded so that something tangible may be procured to replace something else of the like nature which has been destroyed or lost. But money cannot renew a physical frame that has been battered and shattered. All that Judges and courts can do is to award sums which must be regarded as giving reasonable compensation. In the process there must be the endeavour to secure some uniformity in the general method of approach. By common assent awards must be reasonable and must be assessed with moderation. Furthermore, it is eminently desirable that so far as possible comparable injuries should be compensated by comparable awards."
In the same case Lord Devlin observed that the proper approach to the problem was to adopt a test as to what contemporary society would deem to be a fair sum, such as would allow the wrongdoer to "hold up his head among his neighbours and say with their approval that he has done the fair thing", which should be kept in mind by the court in determining compensation in personal injury cases.

3 1963 2 WLR 1359
11. Lord Denning while speaking for the Court of Appeal in the case of Ward v. James4, laid down the following three basic principles to be followed in such like cases:

"Firstly, accessibility: In cases of grave injury, where the body is wrecked or brain destroyed, it is very difficult to assess a fair compensation in money, so difficult that the award must basically be a conventional figure, derived from experience or from awards in comparable cases. Secondly, uniformity: There should be some measure of uniformity in awards so that similar decisions may be given in similar cases; otherwise there will be great dissatisfaction in the community and much criticism of the administration of justice. Thirdly, predictability: Parties should be able to predict with some measure of accuracy the sum which is likely to be awarded in a particular case, for by this means cases can be settled peaceably and not brought to court, a thing very much to the public good."
12. The assessment of damages in personal injury cases raises great difficulties. It is not easy to convert the physical and mental loss into monetary terms. There has to be a measure of calculated guess work and conjecture. An assessment, as best as can, in the circumstances, should be made.

13. In McGregor’s Treatise on Damages, 14th Edn., para 1157, referring to heads of damages in personal injury actions states:

"The person physically injured may recover both for his pecuniary losses and his non­pecuniary losses. Of these the pecuniary losses themselves comprise two separate items, viz., the loss of earnings and other gains which the plaintiff would have made had he not been injured and the medical and other expenses to which he is put as a 4 (1965) 1 All ER 563  result of the injury, and the courts have sub­divided the non­pecuniary losses into three categories, viz., pain and suffering, loss of amenities of life and loss of expectation of life."
14. In M/s Concord of India Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Nirmala Devi and others5, this Court held:

"2….The determination of the quantum must be liberal, not niggardly since the law values life and limb in a free country in generous scales."
15. In R.D. Hattangadi v. Pest Control (India) Pvt. Ltd.6, dealing with the different heads of compensation in injury cases this Court held thus:

"9. Broadly speaking, while fixing the amount of compensation payable to a victim of an accident, the damages have to be assessed separately as pecuniary damages and special damages. Pecuniary damages are those which the victim has actually incurred and which are capable of being calculated in terms of money; whereas non­pecuniary damages are those which are incapable of being assessed by arithmetical calculations. In order to appreciate two concepts pecuniary damages may include expenses incurred by the claimant: (i) medical attendance; (ii) loss of earning of profit up to the date of trial; (iii) other material loss. So far as non­ pecuniary damages are concerned, they may include:
(i) damages for mental and physical shock, pain and suffering already suffered or likely to be suffered in the future; (ii) damages to compensate for the loss of amenities of life which may include a variety of matters, i.e., on account of injury the claimant may not be able to walk, run or sit; (iii) damages for loss of expectation of life, i.e. on account of injury the normal longevity of the person concerned is shortened; (iv) inconvenience, hardship, 5 1980 ACJ 55 (SC) 6 (1995) 1 SCC 551  discomfort, disappointment, frustration and mental stress in life."
16. In Raj Kumar v. Ajay Kumar and Others7, this Court laid down the heads under which compensation is to be awarded for personal injuries.
"6. The heads under which compensation is awarded in personal injury cases are the following:
Pecuniary damages (Special damages)
(i)Expenses relating to treatment, hospitalization, medicines, transportation, nourishing food, and miscellaneous expenditure.
(ii) Loss of earnings (and other gains) which the injured would have made had he not been injured, comprising:
(a) Loss of earning during the period of treatment;
(b) Loss of future earnings on account of permanent disability.
(iii) Future medical expenses.
Non­pecuniary damages (General damages)
(iv) Damages for pain, suffering and trauma as a consequence of the injuries.
(v) Loss of amenities (and/or loss of prospects of marriage).
(vi) Loss of expectation of life (shortening of normal longevity).
In routine personal injury cases, compensation will be awarded only under heads (i), (ii) (a) and (iv). It is only in serious cases of injury, where there is specific medical evidence corroborating the evidence of the claimant, that compensation will be granted under any of the heads (ii)(b), (iii), (v) and (vi) relating to loss of future earnings on account of permanent disability, future medical expenses, loss of amenities (and/or loss of prospects of marriage) and loss of expectation of life.” 7 (2011) 1 SCC 343
17. In K. Suresh v. New India Assurance Company Ltd. and Ors.8, this Court held as follows :

“2...There cannot be actual compensation for anguish of the heart or for mental tribulations. The quintessentiality lies in the pragmatic computation of the loss sustained which has to be in the realm of realistic approximation. Therefore, Section 168 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (for brevity ‘the Act’) stipulates that there should be grant of “just compensation”. Thus, it becomes a challenge for a court of law to determine “just compensation” which is neither a bonanza nor a windfall, and simultaneously, should not be a pittance.”
18. Applying the aforesaid principles, we now proceed to assess the compensation.

Expenses relating to treatment, hospitalization, medicines, transportation etc.

19. The High Court under the two heads of medical treatment and transport has awarded Rs.1,88,501/­. Out of this an amount of Rs.1,38,501/­ is the actual expense incurred on the treatment of Kajal. One must remember that amongst people who are not Government employees and belong to the poorer strata of society, bills are not retained. Some of the bills have been excluded by the courts below only on the ground that the name of the patient is not written on the bill. There is no dispute with regard to the long period of treatment and 8 (2012) 12 SCC 274 hospitalisation of this young girl. Immediately after the accident on 18.10.2007, she was admitted at a hospital in Karnal. From there, she was referred to the PGI, Chandigarh, where she remained admitted from 21.10.2007 till 12.11.2007 and, thereafter, she was again admitted in the hospital from 12.11.2007 till 08.12.2007. She was in the hospital for almost 51 days, and both Dr. Sameer Aggarwal (PW­3) from the hospital at Karnal and Dr. Rajesh Chhabra (PW­4), from PGI, Chandigarh, have supported this. Limiting the amount only to the bills which have been paid in the name of the claimant only, would not be reasonable. Therefore, the amount payable for actual medical expenses is increased from Rs.1,38,501/­ to Rs.2,00,000/­. The amount awarded for transportation at Rs.50,000/­ is reasonable. Therefore, under this head we award Rs.2,50,000/­.

Loss of earnings

20. Both the courts below have held that since the girl was a young child of 12 years only notional income of Rs.15,000/­ per annum can be taken into consideration. We do not think this is a proper way of assessing the future loss of income. This young girl after studying could have worked and would have earned much more than Rs.15,000/­ per annum. Each case has to be decided on its own evidence but taking notional income to be Rs.15,000/­ per annum is not at all justified. The appellant has placed before us material to show that the minimum wages payable to a skilled workman is Rs.4846/­ per month. In our opinion this would be the minimum amount which she would have earned on becoming a major. Adding 40% for the future prospects, it works to be Rs.6784.40/­ per month, i.e., 81,412.80 per annum. Applying the multiplier of 18 it works out to Rs.14,65,430.40, which is rounded off to Rs.14,66,000/­

21. Though the claimant would have been entitled to separate attendant charges for the period during which she was hospitalised, we are refraining from awarding the same because we are going to award her attendant charges for life. At the same time, we are clearly of the view that the tortfeasor cannot take benefit of the gratuitous service rendered by the family members. When this small girl was taken to PGI, Chandigarh, or was in her village, 2­3 family members must have accompanied her. Even if we are not paying them the attendant charges they must be paid for loss of their wages and the amount they would have spent in hospital for food etc. These family members left their work in the village to attend to this little girl in the hospital at Karnal or Chandigarh. In the hospital the claimant would have had at least two attendants, and taking the cost of each at Rs.500/­ per day for 51 days, we award her Rs.51,000/­.

Attendant charges

22. The attendant charges have been awarded by the High Court @ Rs.2,500/­ per month for 44 years, which works out to Rs.13,20,000/­. Unfortunately, this system is not a proper system. Multiplier system is used to balance out various factors. When compensation is awarded in lump sum, various factors are taken into consideration. When compensation is paid in lump sum, this Court has always followed the multiplier system. The multiplier system should be followed not only for determining the compensation on account of loss of income but also for determining the attendant charges etc. This system was recognised by this Court in Gobald Motor Service Ltd. v. R.M.K. Veluswami9. The multiplier system factors in the inflation rate, the rate of interest payable on the lump sum 9 AIR 1962 SC 1 award, the longevity of the claimant, and also other issues such as the uncertainties of life. Out of all the various alternative methods, the multiplier method has been recognised as the most realistic and reasonable method. It ensures better justice between the parties and thus results in award of ‘just compensation’ within the meaning of the Act.

23. It would be apposite at this stage to refer to the observation of Lord Reid in Taylor v. O’Connor10:

"Damages to make good the loss of dependency over a period of years must be awarded as a lump sum and that sum is generally calculated by applying a multiplier to the amount of one year's dependency. That is a perfectly good method in the ordinary case but it conceals the fact that there are two quite separate matters involved, the present value of the series of future payments, and the discounting of that present value to allow for the fact that for one reason or another the person receiving the damages might never have enjoyed the whole of the benefit of the dependency. It is quite unnecessary in the ordinary case to deal with these matters separately. Judges and counsel have a wealth of experience which is an adequate guide to the selection of the multiplier and any expert evidence is rightly discouraged. But in a case where the facts are special, I think, that these matters must have separate consideration if even rough justice is to be done and expert evidence may be valuable or even almost essential. The special factor in the present case is the incidence of Income Tax and, it may be, surtax."
24. This Court has reaffirmed the multiplier method in various cases like Municipal Corporation of Delhi v. Subhagwati 10 1971 AC 115 and Ors.11, U.P. State Road Transport Corporation and Ors. v. Trilok Chandra and Ors.12, Sandeep Khanduja v. Atul Dande and Ors.13. This Court has also recognised that Schedule II of the Act can be used as a guide for the multiplier to be applied in each case. Keeping the claimant’s age in mind, the multiplier in this case should be 18 as opposed to 44 taken by the High Court.

25. Having held so, we are clearly of the view that the basic amount taken for determining attendant charges is very much on the lower side. We must remember that this little girl is severely suffering from incontinence meaning that she does not have control over her bodily functions like passing urine and faeces. As she grows older, she will not be able to handle her periods. She requires an attendant virtually 24 hours a day. She requires an attendant who though may not be medically trained but must be capable of handling a child who is bed ridden. She would require an attendant who would ensure that she does not suffer from bed sores. The claimant has placed before us a notification of the State of Haryana of the year 2010, 11 1966 ACJ 57 12 (1996) 4 SCC 362 13 (2017) 3 SCC 351 wherein the wages for skilled labourer is Rs.4846/­ per month. We, therefore, assess the cost of one attendant at Rs.5,000/­ and she will require two attendants which works out to Rs.10,000/­ per month, which comes to Rs.1,20,000/­ per annum, and using the multiplier of 18 it works out to Rs.21,60,000/­ for attendant charges for her entire life. This takes care of all the pecuniary damages.

Pain, Suffering and Loss of Amenities

26. Coming to the non­pecuniary damages under the head of pain, suffering, loss of amenities, the High Court has awarded this girl only Rs.3,00,000/­. In Mallikarjun v. Divisional Manager, The National Insurance Company Limited and Ors.14, this Court while dealing with the issue of award under this head held that it should be at least Rs.6,00,000/­, if the disability is more than 90%. As far as the present case is concerned, in addition to the 100% physical disability the young girl is suffering from severe incontinence, she is suffering from severe hysteria and above all she is left with a brain of a nine month old child. This is a case where departure has to be made 14 2013 (10) SCALE 668 from the normal rule and the pain and suffering suffered by this child is such that no amount of compensation can compensate.