HEMANT GUPTA, J.

1) The legality and validity of an order passed by the Chief Commissioner of Land Administration, Andhra Pradesh 1 on February 26, 2003 is subject matter of consideration in the present appeal. Vide aforesaid order, 19.26 standard acres of land in Village Poppalguda, District Ranga Reddy was allotted to the appellant by the CCLA (as a delegatee of the Central Government) as balance of verified claim of 43.7 standard acres of land.

2) Some facts would be necessary to appreciate the contention raised by the parties. One Parsram Ramchand Malani, father of the appellant, was resident of Sindh in the present-day Pakistan and 1 for short, ‘CCLA’  after partition, came to settle in Hyderabad. The father of the appellant asserted that he was owner of 83.11 acres of land in Sindh. Such land was verified vide an order passed by Settlement Claim Officer, Bombay on November 22, 1952 (copy submitted by the appellant during the course of the arguments). On the basis of such order, the father of the appellant applied for 200 acres of land in lieu of 83.11 acres of land left by him in the West Pakistan (copy submitted by the appellant during the course of the arguments). It is on the basis of such application that 40.4 standard acres of land (323.10 local acres) was allotted in District Hyderabad East, Village Bata Singaram, measuring 32.12 standard acres (262.11 local acres) and in Hyderabad West, Village Boinapally measuring 7.8 standard acres (60.39 local acres). There is no dispute between the parties till such allotment. Such allotment was made prior to commencement of the Displaced Persons (Compensation & Rehabilitation) Act, 19542. Therefore, to regularise such allotment, another letter was issued on March 24, 1956 after commencement of the Act. The father of the appellant did not raise any claim for allotment of additional land till his death on August 10, 1988. It may be mentioned that Rule 51 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation & Rehabilitation) Rules, 1955 3 provides for scale of compensation in the form of land in accordance with the Land Allotment Scheme in the States of Punjab and Patiala and the East Punjab States Union as set out in Appendix XIV. A perusal of 2 for short, ‘Act’ 3 for short, ‘Rules’  Appendix XIV would show that against area abandoned of 83 standard acres, the entitlement is allotment of 45.8¾ acres. It has also come on record that the father of the appellant, the displaced person, sold the entire land allotted to him soon after allotment.

3) The appellant addressed a letter to the CCLA on March 15, 2001 claiming allotment of 43.7 standard acres against balance of verified claim. The CCLA addressed the letter to the Settlement Officer, Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India on May 5, 2001 but no response was received from the Ministry of Home Affairs. On February 21, 2003, the appellant made another representation to the CCLA pursuant to which CCLA allotted the land measuring 19.26 standard acres (148.3 local acres) in Survey No. 301 to 308, 325 to 328 and 331 part in favour of the appellant on February 26, 2003, which is the subject matter of present appeal.

4) The orders of CCLA were stayed by a memo of Government of Andhra Pradesh dated March 20, 2003. The Secretary to Revenue Department in the Government of Andhra Pradesh initiated suo moto proceedings in respect of six cases of allotment of evacuee property in Hyderabad and Ranga Reddy District. Subsequently, a show-cause notice was issued to the appellant on August 20, 2003. The appellant filed writ petition before High Court of Andhra Pradesh challenging the show-cause notice and the stay order dated March 20, 2003. The High Court disposed of the writ petition  on November 14, 2003 with a direction to the appellant to approach the Revisional Authority. The Revisional Authority dismissed the revision filed by the State on June 28, 2006 holding that the allotment of land is in accordance with the Act.

5) The said order was challenged by the State through the District Collector, Ranga Reddy District by way of a writ petition before the High Court at Hyderabad. Such writ petition was allowed on February 12, 2016. It is the said order which is subject matter of challenge in the present appeal.

6) The High Court has, inter alia, found that CCLA was not the competent authority to make allotment of land, inter alia, for the reason that there was no delegation by the Central Government in his favour to make allotment and secondly, for the reason that the land stood transferred to the State Government on the basis of communication dated May 24, 1980 and was, thus, not available in compensation pool for allotment. Thirdly, the High Court also found that the claim of the appellant suffers from delay and laches.

7) A brief resume of the Act, process of allotment and subsequent repeal of the Act needs to be recapitulated. In the aftermath of partition of the country in 1947, there was large scale movement of population from one part of the country to another country. Since, large scale of population moved, there was a question of the rehabilitation of the population migrating from one country to another to deal with the property of the population who left the  country. The property of the persons who left the country vested in the Union under the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1950. The custodian was responsible for preservation, management and administration of evacuee property as was done by various State legislatures. However, the law governing allotment of evacuee property to displaced persons was statutorily provided by the Act. The procedure was that the persons who migrated to the country will apply for verification of their property including land left behind in West Pakistan and such property was verified on the basis of revenue record either received by the Government of India or verified by the revenue authorities in Pakistan. Such verification of the property was called as verified claim in terms of Section 2(e) of the Act. Such verified claim entitles the migrant defined as displaced person in Section 2(b) of the Act for compensation in the manner prescribed under Section 8 of the Act. The property left by the persons migrating to Pakistan (evacuee persons) was put in the compensation pool as defined in Section 2(a) of the Act and was a source of resettling the displaced persons.

8) The process of resettling the displaced persons is based upon the following steps as found by this Court in Amar Singh & Ors. v. Custodian, Evacuee Property, Punjab & Anr.4:

“1. Registration and verification of land claims.
2. Assessment and valuation of such claims.
3. Classification of the villages and of lands of evacuees 4 AIR 1957 SC 599  available for allotment.

4. Allocation of the claims to various areas with reference to such classification.

5. Allotment of lands to individuals with reference to the valuation of their claims, guided by various considerations, priorities and preferences and so forth administratively determined.”

9) The first step is registration and verification of land claims i.e. verification of the property such as land in the present day Pakistan. The assessment and valuation of such claims is the second step which is required, for which Rule 51 read with Appendix XIV prescribes the scale of land which can be allotted in view of verified claim of the property left in the present day Pakistan. The third step is identification of evacuee land available which forms part of the compensation pool. Such land including urban and rural land available for allotment with reference to the valuation of the claims guided by other consideration, priorities and preferences.

10) The displaced person as defined in Section 2(b) of the Act includes successor-in-interest of any such person. Such displaced person having a verified claim has to make an application for payment of compensation on or before June 30, 1955. The Settlement Commissioner would make an inquiry in the manner prescribed to determine the amount of compensation. A displaced person is entitled to payment of cash compensation or compensation in terms of land out of compensation pool in terms of Section 8 of the  Act. Section 12 empowers the Central Government to acquire any evacuee property for a public purpose being a purpose connected with the relief and rehabilitation of displaced persons. In terms of sub-section (4) of Section 12, all evacuee property acquired in terms of sub-section (1) or sub-section (3) forms part of the compensation pool. Section 16 of the Act empowers the Central Government to take such measures as it considers necessary or expedient for the custody, management and disposal of the compensation pool. Section 16(2)(b) empowers the Central Government to constitute such authority or corporation as it may deem fit for the management and disposal of the compensation pool.

11) The Managing Officer or the Managing Corporation is competent to transfer any property out of compensation pool in terms of Section 20 of the Act but the allotment is as per the valuation determined by the Settlement Commissioner in terms of Section 20(1)(c) of the Act. The relevant provisions of the statute read as under:

“THE DISPLACED PERSONS (COMPENSATION & REHABILITATION) ACT, 1954 2(a) "compensation pool" means the compensation pool constituted under section 14;
2(b) "displaced person" means any person who, on account of the setting up of the Dominions of India and Pakistan, or on account of civil disturbances or the fear of such disturbances in any area now forming part of West Pakistan, has after the first day of March, 1947, left, or been displaced from, his place of residence in such area and who has been subsequently residing in India, and includes any person who is resident in any place now forming part of India and who for that reason is unable or has been rendered unable to manage, supervise or control any immovable property belonging to him in West Pakistan, and also includes the successors- in interest of any such person;

xx xx xx

4. Application for payment of compensation. – (1) The Central Government shall, from time to time, but not later than the thirtieth day of June, 1955, by notification in the Official Gazette, require all displaced persons having a verified claim to make applications for the payment of compensation and any such notification may be issued with reference to displaced persons residing in any State or in any one of a group of States.

xx xx xx

8. Form and manner of payment of compensation. – (1) A displaced person shall be paid out of the compensation pool the amount of net compensation determined under sub- section (3) of section 7 as being payable to him, and subject to any rules that may be made under this Act, the Settlement Commissioner or any other officer or authority authorised by the Chief Settlement Commissioner in this behalf may make such payment in any one of the following forms or partly in one and partly in any other form, namely:-

(a) in cash;

(b) in Government bonds;

(c) by sale to the displaced person of any property from the compensation pool and setting off the purchase money against the compensation payable to him;

(d) by any other mode of transfer to the displaced person of any property from the compensation pool and setting off the valuation of the property against the compensation payable to him;

(e) by transfer of shares or debentures in any company or corporation;

(f) in such other form as may be prescribed. (2) For the purpose of payment of compensation under this Act, the Central Government may, by rules, provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:-

(a) the classes of displaced persons to whom compensation may be paid;

(b) the scales according to which, the form and manner in which, and the instalment by which, compensation may be paid to different classes of displaced persons;

(c) the valuation of all property, shares and debentures to be transferred to displaced persons;

(d) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed.

xx xx xx

14. Compensation pool. – (1) For the purpose of payment of compensation and rehabilitation grants to displaced persons, there shall be constituted a compensation pool which shall consist of—

(a) all evacuee property acquired under section 12, including the sale proceeds of any such property and all profits and income accruing from such property;

(b) such cash balances lying with the Custodian as may, by order of the Central Government, be transferred to the compensation pool;

(c) such contributions, in any form whatsoever, as may be made to the compensation pool by the Central Government or any State Government;

(d) such other assets as may be prescribed. (2) The compensation pool shall vest in the Central Government free from all encumbrances and shall be utilised in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder.

xx xx xx

16. Management of compensation pool. – (1) The Central Government may take such measures as it considers necessary or expedient for the custody, management and disposal of the compensation pool in order that it may be effectively utilised in accordance with the provisions of this Act.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the Central Government may, for the purposes referred to in sub-section (1), by notification in the Official Gazette.-

(a) appoint such officers as it may deem fit (hereinafter referred to as managing officers); or

(b) constitute such authority or corporation, as it may deem fit (hereinafter referred to as managing corporation).

(3) Every managing corporation shall be constituted under such name and shall consist of such number of persons as may be specified in the notification, and every such corporation shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal and shall by the said name sue and be sued:

Provided that one-third of the members of every managing corporation shall be non-officials.