Rastogi, J.

1. These appeals arise from the judgment dated 6 th September, 2010 passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh in Writ Petition No. 10963 of 2009 and 12485 of 2009 setting aside the award passed by the Central Government Signature Not Verified Digitally signed by SATISH KUMAR YADAV Date: 2019.07.05 16:50:05 IST Reason:

Industrial Tribunal(CGIT), Jabalpur dated 16th September, 2009 answering the reference in the affirmative form and directing the contract labourers who were in the employment of SAIL from 1993 till 1996(17th March, 1993 to April 1996) to be reinstated, and their cases be considered for regularisation in accordance with Para 125 of the Judgment of this Court in Steel Authority of India Ltd. and Others Vs. National Union Waterfront Workers and Others1 declining to grant them back wages.

2. The case involves a chequered history and almost after four rounds of litigation, the matter has reached at a stage where the reference was made by the appropriate Government under Section 10(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 to decide the industrial dispute raised by the Union, namely, Ispat Khadan Janta Mazdoor Union vide notification dated 27th January, 2003 followed with 22nd February, 2005.

3. The seminal facts in brief which may be relevant for the present purpose are that the appellant Steel Authority of India Limited (hereinafter being referred to as “SAIL”) is a Government of India undertaking and is a State within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India and has steel plants in different 1 2001(7) SCC 1 parts of India. SAIL has one of the captive lime stone and dolomite mines in Kuteshwar in the District of Katni of Madhya Pradesh. Limestone and Dolomite are necessary ingredients for manufacture of steel. The SAIL did blasting work as this work had been departmentalised vide Notification dated 15 th December, 1979 w.e.f. 22nd June, 1980. The contract labour of the contractors at Kuteshwar Lime Stone Mines were doing the same jobs as enumerated in schedule of the prohibition Notification No. S.O. 707 dated 17th March, 1993 issued under Section 10(1) of the Contract Labour(Regulation & Abolition) Act, 1970(hereinafter referred to as “CLRA Act”).

4. It is not disputed that the establishment of the appellant(SAIL) is the registered establishment in terms of Section 7 of the CLRA Act and the contractors through whom the contract labour was engaged were also holding a valid licence under Section 12 of the CLRA Act and the workmen engaged as contract labour by the contractor in the establishment of the appellant(SAIL) were paid their due wages in terms of the tri­ partite agreement entered into from time to time not less than the rates so prescribed by the authority under the Minimum Wages Act, 1948.

5. The appropriate Government at a later stage issued a prohibition notification of employment of contract labour for the establishment wherein their services hired by the appellant SAIL under Section 10(1) of the CLRA Act dated 17 th March, 1993, the extract of which is referred to hereunder:­ “4. The Notification No.S.O.707 dated 17­3­93 was issued and published by the Government of India whereby prohibited with effect from the date of publication of this notification, the employment of Contract Labour in the works specified in the following schedule in the Lime Stone and Dolomite Mines in the country namely:

SCHEDULE a. Raising of minerals including breaking sizing sorting of Lime Stone Dolomite and, b. Transportation of limestone and dolomite which includes loading and unloading from trucks, dumpers, conveyors and transportation from mine site to factory.”
6. Pursuant to a prohibition notification issued by the appropriate Government under Section 10(1) of the CLRA Act, the relationship of contractor and contract labour stands ceased and by legal fiction, contract comes to extinct and the indisputed fact which has come on record is that no fresh agreement, in the interregnum period, was executed and the existing agreement to whom the appellant & contract labour is a signatory was extended from time to time by the competent authority and the contract labour was allowed to continue on the same terms and conditions till their services were terminated by the contractor in the month of April, 1996.

7. Prior to the judgment of the Constitution Bench of this Court[Steel Authority of India Ltd. and Others(supra)], the three Judge Bench of this Court in Air India Statutory Corporation and Others Vs. United Labour Union and Others2 discussed the legal consequence of the prohibition notification under Section 10(1) of the CLRA Act prohibiting employment of contract labour, it was held that on abolition of contract labour system from any establishment under Section 10 of the Act by the appropriate Government, the logical and legitimate consequences were that the erstwhile regulated contract labourer covered by the sweep of such abolition for the activities concerned would be entitled to be treated as direct 2 1997(9) SCC 377 employee of the employer on whose establishment they were earlier working and they would be entitled to be treated as regular employees from the day on which the contract labour system in the establishment for the work which they were doing gets abolished.

8. The effect of the prohibition notification under Section 10(1) of the CLRA Act issued by the appropriate Government at the later stage, came to be examined by the Constitution Bench of this Court in Steel Authority of India Ltd. and Others (supra) wherein it was held that there is no provision under CLRA Act whether expressly or necessary implication which provides for automatic absorption of contract labour on issuance of a notification by the appropriate Government under Section 10(1), prohibiting employment of contract labour in any process, operation or other work in any other establishment and overruled the judgment in Air India Statutory Corporation and Others (supra) making it clear that neither Section 10 nor any other provision in the CLRA Act provides for automatic absorption of contact labour on issuance of a notification by the appropriate Government under Section 10(1) of the CLRA Act and consequently the principal employer is not required by operation of law to absorb the contract labour working in the establishment. The exposition of law will be discussed at the later stage.

9. It reveals from the record that after the Constitution Bench Judgment of this Court, the matter was agitated by the workers union before the appropriate Government and after failure of the conciliation proceedings, the case of 3404 workmen was referred for adjudication by the appropriate Government vide its notification dated 27th January, 2003 followed with 22nd February, 2005 to the Central Government Industrial Tribunal(CGIT) is reproduced hereunder:­

1. “The Government of India, Ministry of Labour vide its Notification No.L­29011/97/2002­IR(M) dated 27­1­ 2003 has referred the following dispute for adjudication by this tribunal:­ “I. “Whether the action of the Mines Manager, Koteshwar Lime Stone Mines of Steel Authority of India Ltd. in terminating services of 3404 (3380+24­ as per list attached) mine workers in April 1996 who ceased to be contract labour after prohibition of employment of contract labour in Lime Stone Mine vide Notification No.S.O.707 dated 17­3­93 was legal, fair and justified? If not, what relief the concerned workmen or heirs in case of deceased worker are entitled to?

 II. Whether the action of the Mines manager, Koteshwar Lime Stone Mines of Steel Authority of India ltd. in denying terminal benefits of gratuity retrenchment compensation and exgratia applicable to VRS seeking employees is fair and justified. If not, to what relief these workers/heirs are entitled to? III. Whether the action of the management of the Mines Manager, Koteshwar Lime Stone Mines of Steel Authority of India Ltd. in disregarding Clause­8 of Memorandum of Agreement signed between the Steel Authority of India, New Delhi and their Unions including HMS and employing workers through contractors on jobs of permanent and perennial nature in Mines between 5­20 years even without ensuring statutory wages and service conditions was legal, fair and justified? If not, to what relief concerned workmen/heirs are entitled?” CORRIGENDUM “Whether the employment of the workmen mentioned in this Ministry’s order of even number dated 27­1­2003 through contractors is sham and bogus and whether in effect there is direct employment by the company? If so, to what relief the workmen concerned are entitled?”

10. The learned Tribunal(CGIT), as a fact finding authority, taking note of the pleadings on record framed the following issues:­ “I. Whether the reference R/40/03 is maintainable? II. Whether the employment of the workmen through contractors is sham and bogus and whether the said employment is considered to be direct employment by the management?

 III.Whether the action of the Mines Manager, Kuteshwar Lime Stone Mines of the Steel Authority of India Ltd. in terminating the services of 3404(3380+24) as per list attached mine workers in April 1996 who ceased to be contract labour after prohibition of employment of contract labour in lime stone vide Notification No.S.O.707 dated 17­03­93 was legal, fair and justified?

IV.Whether the said contact workers/heirs are entitled the terminal Benefits of gratuity, retrenchment compensation and ex­gratia applicable to VRS from SAIL?

V. Whether Lime Stone Mines violated the provision of Clause­8 of the memorandum of agreement signed between the SAIL, New Delhi and their Unions and employing workers through contractors on jobs of permanent and perennial nature was justified, legal and fair?

VI.Whether the workmen/heirs are entitled to the wages to the post in which they were engaged with parity of wages with that of regular employees of the management with all consequential benefits? VII.Any other relief, the workmen/heirs are entitled to?”

11. The parties to the reference were called upon to lay evidence in support of their respective claim and after taking note of the evidence(oral & documentary), the Tribunal recorded the facts in seriatim emerging from the records as under:­ (1) The evidence shows that the respective contractors employed the contract labours for their own and they were the appointing authority.

 (2) Wage slips, wagesheets and the evidence of the witnesses clearly show that the contractors were paying wages to the contract labours.

(3) Exhibit M/8 filed in R721/05 and the evidence of the witnesses show that the contractor dismissed the employee and also transferred some of the employees from the place of work and had disciplinary authority. (4) The contract papers entered into between the management and the contractors and the evidence of the witnesses clearly show that contractors had full control and supervision over the work. The management had only to see that the labour laws were being implemented and specified approved grade of lime stone was being supplied.

(5) The contract papers and the evidence show that the contractors had full control over the skilled and professional work.

(6) It is further clear from the contract papers that the SAIL had right to reject the limestone, if it was not within the specified approved grade as per terms and conditions of the agreement.

(7) The contract agreements further show that there was penal clause, if there was any breach of contract.

12. The Tribunal taking note of the evidence including oral and documentary adduced in support of the reference held that the contract between the Management(SAIL) and the contractors was genuine and not sham and bogus and the contract workers were allowed to continue even after the prohibition notification under Section 10(1) dated 17th March, 1993 under the CLRA Act on the same terms and conditions and the services of the contract labourer were terminated by the Contractor in April, 1996.

13. It may be noted that status of the workers after the issuance of notification dated 17th March, 1993 has also been examined by the Tribunal and held as follows:­ (1) The contract labours after notification cease to function.

(2) The contract labours were still working in the establishment from 1993 to April 1996 under the umbrella of the contractors who may be called as agent of the Principal employer or were intermediary between the contract labours and the Principal Employer after the publication of notification.

(3) The contract between the Principal Employer and the contractors after publication of the notification ceases to exist and became not genuine.

(4) The wages were being paid to the contract labour by the so called contractors in the same way as from before.

(5) The principal Employer was in need of the workers for the specified works even after the publication of the notification as same workers were continuing in work till April, 1996.

(6) There is no evidence on the record to show that the principal employer adopted the procedure of regularization and had intended to employ regular workers as has been directed by the Hon’ble Apex Court at Para 125 sub­para­6 in the Constitution Bench Judgment in the case of SAIL versus National Union Water Front Workers (Supra) after the contract was found genuine before the notification.  (7) There was no automatic absorption of contract labour on issuing the notification prohibiting the employment of contract labours.

(8) Contract labours were found employees of the respective contractors before notification.

14. At the same time, in para 85 of the Award, the Tribunal further held that after issuance of the prohibition notification dated 17th March, 1993 in the instant case, the principal employer(SAIL) was prohibited to employ any contract labour in any process, operation or other work in the establishment and when the contract with the contractors after prohibition notification became void and not genuine and the extension of the period of contract of the respective contractors which has been allowed to continue in the establishment by operation of law became ab­initio void and sham and bogus. Para 85 of the Award is as under:­ “85. It is an established fact that the notification dated 7­3­93 came to the effect prohibiting the employment of contract labours from the date of its publication. As such, in the light of the constitutional bench judgment in SAIL versus National Water Front Workers Union & others (Supra) the contract of Principal employer with contractor in regard to the contract labour comes to an end beyond shadow of doubts and the contract with regard to the contract labours subsequently after the notification dated 17­3­  1993 becomes not genuine. The Principal employer was prohibited to employ any contract labour in any process, operation or other work in the establishment in any process, operation or other work in the establishment to which the notification relates at any time thereafter. It is evident that when the contract of the contractors after notification became itself void and not genuine, the extension of the period of contract of the respective contractors would be ab­initio void and sham and bogus. Thus it is established that the contract of Principal employer with contractors in regard to the contract labours became subsequently sham and bogus after the notification No. S.O. 707 dated 17­3­1993 coming into the effect from the date of its publication.”

15. The Tribunal finally held that the employment of the contract labourer through contractors was not sham and bogus before notification dated 17th March, 1993, but after publication of the said notification, by operation of law, the contract through contractors could not be considered to be genuine but became void and sham as the contract labour was allowed to continue in the establishment till April 1996. It was further observed that the Union is at liberty to take recourse of the penal consequences as mandated under Section 23 to 25 of the CLRA Act. Rest of the issues framed by the Tribunal(Issue nos. 3,4, 5 & 6) have been consequently decided accordingly under the Industrial Award dated 16th September, 2009.