Madan B. Lokur, J.

1. In the record of proceedings of this Court dated 9th August, 2017 it is noted that learned counsel for the petitioner would like to highlight three issues pertaining to the implementation of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 (for short the Act) and the Scheme framed thereunder. These issues are:

1. Delay in payment of wages and compensation to the beneficiaries under the Act and the Scheme framed thereunder.
2. Reduction in person days and consequent reduction in allocation of funds from the projection made by the State Signature Not Verified Digitally signed by Governments and the Union Territory Administrations. MEENAKSHI KOHLI Date: 2018.05.18 15:49:42 IST Reason:

3. Absence of social audits being conducted.

2. We have heard learned counsel for the petitioner as well as the learned Attorney General in detail in respect of these issues and have also gone through the various affidavits and written submissions.

3. The Act was enacted by Parliament with the objective, inter alia, of enhancing the livelihood security of poor households in rural areas by providing at least one hundred days guaranteed wage employment to every such household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work.

4. Section 3(1) of the Act provides that the State Government shall in rural areas (as notified by the Central Government) provide to every household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work not less than one hundred days of such work in a financial year in accordance with the Scheme made under the Act. Section 3(3) provides that the disbursement of daily wages shall be made on a weekly basis or in any case not later than a fortnight after such work has been done. Section 3 of the Act reads as follows:

“3. Guarantee of rural employment to households. - (1) Save as otherwise provided, the State Government shall, in such rural area in the State as may be notified by the Central Government, provide to every household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work not less than one hundred days of such work in a financial year in accordance with the Scheme made under this Act. (2) Every person who has done the work given to him under the Scheme shall be entitled to receive wages at the wage rate for each day of work. (3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the disbursement of daily wages shall be made on a weekly basis or in any case not later than a fortnight after the date on which such work was done.
 (4) The Central Government or the State Government may, within the limits of its economic capacity and development, make provisions for securing work to every adult member of a household under a Scheme for any period beyond the period guaranteed under sub-section (1), as may be expedient.”

5. Section 4 of the Act provides that to give effect to the provisions of Section 3 thereof every State Government shall frame a Scheme providing not less than one hundred days of guaranteed employment in a financial year to every household in the rural areas covered under the Scheme and whose adult members, by application, volunteer to do unskilled manual work subject to the conditions laid down in the Act and in the Scheme.

6. In terms of Section 4 of the Act a working Scheme has been formulated and is in place and there is no dispute in this regard.

Reduction in person days through approved labour budget and allocation of funds

7. The grievance of the petitioner under this head is succinctly stated and understood by the Union of India in its written submissions of 14th March, 2018 as follows:

(a) “Approved Labour Budget” violates the essence of the Act which does not envisage any role for the Central or State Government in altering the labour budget in any form.
(b) The labour budget projections are arrived at through the process  spelt out in Section 14(6) and paragraph 7 of Schedule I of the Act 1 and any reduction of the labour budget goes against the spirit of the Act.

(c) The Central Government has started exercising discretionary powers in deciding how much a State can spend on generating employment.

(d) The generation of the Muster Roll is halted once the State has reached the “Approved Labour Budget”.

To appreciate the grievance of the petitioner, it is necessary to refer to a few more provisions of the Act.

Approved labour budget

8. Article 243-G of the Constitution was introduced by the 73rd Amendment Act and this endows the Panchayats with such powers and authority as may be necessary to enable them to function as institutions of State Government.

9. Section 14 of the Act provides for the appointment of a District Programme Coordinator who is the Chief Executive Officer of the District Panchayat or the Collector or any other district level officer of an appropriate rank as decided by the State Government. The District Programme Coordinator There shall be a systematic, participatory planning exercise at each tier of Panchayat, conducted between August to December month of every year, as per a detailed methodology laid down by the State Government. All works to be executed by the Gram Panchayats shall be identified and placed before the Gram Sabha, and such works which are to be executed by the intermediate Panchayats or other implementing agencies shall be placed before the intermediate or District Panchayats, along with the expected outcomes. is expected to implement the Scheme in the district, in addition to his/her other functions.

10. Section 14(6) of the Act requires the District Programme Coordinator to prepare, in the month of December every year, a labour budget for the next financial year containing the details of anticipated demand for unskilled manual work in the district and the plan for engagement of labourers in the works covered under the Scheme and submit it to the District Panchayat.

11. The step by step requirement (as submitted by the petitioner and in which there is no serious disagreement voiced by the Union of India)2 for identification of works, their finalization, planning and approval of the labour budget under the Act and the Scheme is as follows:

Step 1 Gram Panchayat identifies Section 16(1) of the Act:

works to be taken up in area “The Gram Panchayat shall be responsible for based on recommendations of identification of the projects in the Gram the Gram/Ward Sabha Sabha area to be taken under a Scheme as per the recommendations of the Gram Sabha and the Ward Sabha and for executing and supervision of works.” Step 2 Gram Panchayat to forward the Section 16(4) of the Act:
works identified by the Gram “The Gram Panchayat shall forward its Sabha to the Programme proposals for the development projects Officer for scrutiny + including the order of priority between preliminary approval different works to the Programme Officer for scrutiny and preliminary approval prior to the commencement of the year in which it is proposed to be executed.” Step 3 Programme Officer at the Section 15(4) of the Act:
Block level consolidates plans “The Programme Officer shall prepare a plan received by allGram for the Block under his jurisdiction by Essentially this is only a procedural matter. Too much should not be read into the ‘disagreement’ if any.
 Panchayats consolidating the project proposals prepared by the Gram Panchayat and the proposals received from intermediate panchayats” Step 4 Block Panchayat to approve Section 16(3)(b) of the Act:

the block level plan prepared “to approve the Block level Plan for by the Programme Officer and forwarding it to the district Panchayat at the forwarding it to the District district level for final approval” Panchayat for approval Step 5 District Programme Section 13(3)(a) of the Act:
Coordinator to consolidate all“The District Programme Coordinator shall “consolidate the plans prepared by the Blocks Block level plans and submit it to the District Panchayat and project proposals received from implementing agencies for inclusion in the shelf of projects to be approved by the Panchayat at the District level” Step 6 District Panchayat finalizes Section 13(2)(a) of the Act:
and approves block-wise works “The functions of the Panchayats at the district to be taken up under the level shall be-
            Scheme                           (a) To finalise and approve block-wise
                                                 shelf of projects to be taken up under a
                                                 programme under the Scheme”



It is after the above exercise is complete that the role of the District Programme Coordinator commences.
12. At this stage it is important to notice: (i) The State Government and the Central Government have really no specific role in the formulation of programmes for the benefit of the rural areas and in the expenditure that would be required to carry out the development activities of the Panchayat; (ii) The provisions and steps form the basis of the number of person days of work in a year in each year and the fund requirement; (iii) The requirements made out are anticipatory and indicative.
13. The submission of the petitioner is that, as mandated by the Act, every State Government obtains detailed information from every district and prepares a labour budget which indicates the expenditure anticipated and the person days necessary for implementation of the programmes in the concerned rural area However, the Central Government in the Ministry of Rural Development through an Empowered Committee discusses the annual labour budget with representatives of the State Governments and after such discussions, an ‘agreed to labour budget’ (different from the labour budget) is prepared. According to the petitioner, there is no question of having these discussions or an ‘agreed to labour budget’ particularly when a detailed assessment has been made by the District Programme Coordinator and the Panchayat and forwarded by the State Government to the Central Government.

14. On the other hand, the view of the Central Government, based on experience, is that some State Governments are not able to fully utilize the proposed labour budget and therefore through discussions, the labour budget is appropriately rationalized to a reasonable figure based on the person days necessary. As mentioned above, this is objected to by the petitioner.

15. The further grievance of the petitioner is that the ‘agreed to labour budget’ works as a cap on the expenditure for every financial year and the generation of the Muster Roll is stopped. Therefore, even though there would be unemployed persons willing to do some unskilled manual work but they are prevented from doing so because of an informal cap on expenditure.
16. Essentially, the submission of learned counsel for the petitioner is that first of all there cannot be an ‘agreed to labour budget’ for the reason that once the State Government raises a demand for implementation of the Scheme under the Act, the Central Government must release the funds without any reduction in the quantum. The second objection by learned counsel for the petitioner is that if the amount demanded by the State Government is not released there is a very strong possibility of some persons not being able to get employment due to insufficiency of funds and also due to the informal cap on the availability of funds.

17. We are not in agreement with learned counsel on both the submissions. We may mention that we have already dealt with some facets of this issue in our judgment and order of 13th May, 20163 and have nothing to add to that.

18. Rule 5 of The National Employment Guarantee Fund Rules, 2006 provides, inter alia, for release of grants from the National Employment Guarantee Fund (NEGF) to the State Governments and Union Territory Administrations. It prescribes that:

“(1) Before the beginning of each financial year on or before 31st January, all Secretaries of the State Governments and Union Territories concerned with the implementation of the Act and the State Employment Guarantee Scheme shall present their annual work plan and labour budget to the Ministry of Rural Development.
Swaraj Abhiyan (III) v. Union of India & Ors. (2016) 7 SCC 544  (2) The State Governments and Union Territories may also in their annual work plan and labour budget submit proposals for any work other than those specified in Schedule I of the Act.

(3) The Ministry of Rural Development may examine the proposals received by it on or before the 31st of January of each financial year and review the performance of the States and Union Territories with respect to the implementation of the Act and estimate the amount to be released to the State Governments and Union Territory Administrations from the National Fund.

(4) Release of funds to the State Governments and Union Territory Administrations shall be made in accordance with the directions issued by the Ministry of Rural Development from time to time.” [Emphasis supplied by us].

19. It is quite clear that apart from anything else, the Central Government is statutorily empowered to scrutinize and assess the funds to be released to the State Governments and Union Territory Administrations for the purposes of the Act. The final assessment is made by the Empowered Committee in consultation with the State Governments and Union Territory Administrations. Therefore, it is not as if the ‘agreed to labour budget’ or the ‘approved labour budget’ is fixed arbitrarily by the Central Government. We do not see anything objectionable in this, more particularly since the process is backed by statutory provisions.

Cap on funds

20. It has been brought on record by the Union of India in its affidavit of 4 th December, 2017 that not only is there no informal cap on the release of funds, but whenever required, necessary funds have been released over and above the ‘agreed to labour budget’. It is stated that in 2015-16 as many as 16 State Governments and Union Territory Administrations had exceeded the ‘agreed to labour budget’ and funds had been released. In 2016-17 as many as 20 State Governments and Union Territory Administrations had exceeded the ‘agreed to labour budget’ and funds released. The position was similar for 2017-18 with 12 State Governments and Union Territory Administrations exceeding the ‘agreed to labour budget’ and funds released.4 This is possible only if there is no cap, informal or otherwise and the generation of the Muster Roll continues.

21. Learned counsel for the petitioner pointed out instances where there had been a shortage of funds released to two States namely Tripura and Telangana.

22. In this regard, it was pointed out by the learned Attorney General that as far as Tripura is concerned, there were some allegations of corruption in the sense of mis-utilization of funds and that was being investigated. It was reported that the funds made available had not been used for the purpose for which they were released. We need not delve into this issue at all and leave it at that.

23. As far as the State of Telangana is concerned it was stated that according to the State functionaries there was 100% utilization by June 2017 itself that is in a period of about two months. We find this difficult to appreciate and in fact we were informed by the learned Attorney General that the factual position is otherwise and it was found that Telangana had not been able to utilize 100% Upto the date of the written submissions, that is, 13th April, 2018 but the data is said to be incomplete funds released as per the ‘agreed to labour budget.’ In the written submissions filed by the Union of India on 13th April, 2018 it is stated as follows:

“However, the State has never exceeded 12 crores person days except in FY 2015-16 which was a severe drought year and provision for additional 50 days were granted by Central Government to help the rural poor tide over the impacts of the national calamity. The State after due consultation with the Ministry agreed to 12 crores person days for FY 2017-18. This was 20% more than the approved Labour Budget of FY 2016-17 and due consideration was given to the increased demand for work under the scheme. It is important to mention here that Telangana received the highest ever allocation (Rs.2539.20 Cr) of MGNREGA funds in FY 2017-18. Despite having no paucity of funds in FY 2017- 18, the State could not generate 100% of the agreed to Labour Budget.”