J U D G M E N T Dipak Misra, CJI The legal representatives of the deceased Firoz preferred a claim   petition   being   MAC   Petition   No.   64   of   2006   before   the Chairman,   Motor   Accidents   Claims   Tribunal   (for   short,   ‘the tribunal’), Washim under Section 166 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (for brevity, “the Act”) claiming compensation of Rs. 15 lacs on the foundation that the deceased was an Assistant Teacher in Urdu   Primary   School   at   Pusad   run   by   Zilla   Parishad,   Yeotmal and was drawing monthly salary of Rs. 8,123/­ and they were Signature Not Verified dependent on the income of the deceased.   The assertion in the Digitally signed by CHETAN KUMAR Date: 2018.07.03 16:55:20 IST Reason:

claim petition was that land situated in survey number 136 of village Kajleshwar, Tq Karanja, Washim District was belonging to Respondent No. 1 who had commenced the work for digging of well in the above agricultural land. On 08.04.2005 at about 4.15 p.m., when the deceased was returning towards his house after purchasing certain articles from the grocery shop, a heavy stone came flying and fell on his head, as a consequence of which, he sustained   grievous   injuries  and  was  carried  for   treatment  in   a jeep to the hospital where he  was declared dead. The case of the claimants   before   the   Tribunal   was   that   the   stone   fell   on   the deceased due to blasting operation carried out for digging of well in the field of respondent No. 1. It is further put forth that the tractor   belonging   to   the   1st  respondent   and   insured   with   the respondent  No.  4  was   used for  digging up well by  keeping the blasting machine and, therefore, the causing of death by the use of the tractor was established.

2. The tribunal, appreciating the materials brought on record, came to hold that digging of the well with use of blasting machine was carried on in the field of the owner and the tractor was used for digging of the well with the blasting machine.   Thereafter, it proceeded to deal with fixing of the liability and the quantum of the   compensation.   On   the   first   aspect,   it   took   note   of   the submission advanced on behalf of the insurer that the owner had committed   breach   of   the   policy   by   using   the   tractor   for commercial use.  To bolster the said stance, the insurer asserted that   the   owner   had   not   taken   permission   from   the   competent authority   for   carrying   on   the   blasting   work   in   his   field   and, hence, there was violation of the policy.  On behalf of the owner, the  stand was taken that the tractor was used for agricultural purposes, for digging of the well was carried on for the irrigation of the crops which work was incidental to agriculture and hence, there was no violation of the policy.

3. The tribunal came to hold that on the basis of the material brought on record, the vehicle was used for commercial purpose and, therefore, there was a fundamental breach of the insurance policy.   It   further   opined   that   the   cause   of   the   death   of   the deceased was due to vehicular accident because of the evidence brought   on   record.     Emphasis   was   laid   on   the   fundamental breach of the insurance policy by the owner and, ultimately the liability was fastened on him directing him and other respondent to pay the compensation of Rs. 9,30,000/­ with interest at the rate of 6% per annum from the date of the petition till realization.
4. Two   appeals   were   preferred   before   the   High   Court challenging the award of the tribunal.  The High Court noted that the power for trigger of the explosives came from the battery of the   tractor   which   was   parked   nearby   and   as   explosion   took place,   a   large   stone   flew   in   air   and   fell   on   the   head   of   the deceased who was standing in front of a shop that was 300 ft. away. It addressed to the concept of ‘use of motor vehicle’ and in that context stated that the tractor, when it is stationary with the additional   implements/machines   can   be   run   using   the   power generated   by   its   engine   for   thrashing   and   cutting   agriculture produce.     It   also   dwelt   upon   the   concept   that   when   a   storage battery of a vehicle is disconnected and taken for some other use, sometimes   it  is   used   for   other   purposes  without   disconnecting the   battery   from   the   vehicle.     On   the   factual   issue,   the   High Court   opined   that   the   battery   of   the   vehicle   was   still   installed inside and the terminals were used for providing power to the use of explosive. However, it further went on to say that the battery was practically detached from the vehicle and was not a part of the vehicle and on that basis ruled that use of battery for causing explosion cannot be said to be use of  vehicle, for the vehicle was not used for causing explosion. Eventually, it held that it could not be said that the accident that took place had arisen out of the use of motor vehicle as defined in Section 165 of the Act and, therefore,   the   claim   petition   under   Section   166   was   not maintainable. Expressing the aforesaid view, the High Court set aside the award passed by the tribunal.

5. We   have   heard   Ms.   Aparna   Jha,   learned   counsel   for   the appellants,   Ms.   Aishwarya   Bhati,   learned   counsel   for   the respondent No. 2 and Mr. Abhishek Kumar, learned counsel for the respondent No.  4. 

6. As is noticeable, the High Court has recorded a finding that the   battery   was   practically   detached   from   the   vehicle.   The correctness of this finding is required to be determined first. It is necessary to note here that the tribunal has treated the accident to be a vehicular accident and entertained the claim. As we find, the High Court has not analyzed any evidence brought on record to   come   to   the   conclusion   that   the   battery   of   the   vehicle   was practically detached from the vehicle and was not a part of the vehicle.   On   the   contrary,   the   Tribunal   had   noticed   that   the panchnama of the tractor, Ex­42, clearly showed that the tractor was in the field and the blasting machine was found on tractor with   wrapped   gas   pipe   and   an   explosive   battery   found   on   the tractor with the wooden cover.  It has referred to Ex­41 and other oral evidence to record the finding that the blasting machine was kept  on the  tractor driven by  the driver engaged by  the owner and the tractor was used for digging of the well with the blasting machine. The insurer, as is evident, had only raised a singular plea   with   regard   to   use   of   the   tractor,   namely,   ‘commercial purpose’ and on that foundation, it had advanced the stance that there   had   been   fundamental   breach   of   the   insurance   policy. Keeping in view the evidence on record, we agree with the view expressed by the tribunal that the battery was still installed on the   vehicle   and   the   power   was   drawn   from   the   battery   for explosive purposes.   Having arrived at the aforesaid conclusion, we shall proceed to deal with the concept of ‘use’ and determine whether the accident could be regarded as a vehicle accident. 

7. Section   165   deals   with   the   claims   tribunals.   It   uses   the word  ‘use  of  motor  vehicles’. For  the sake of completeness, we reproduce the relevant part of the said provision:­ “Section 165. Claims Tribunals.— (1) A State Government may, by notification in the Official   Gazette,   constitute   one   or   more   Motor Accidents   Claims   Tribunals   (hereafter   in   this Chapter   referred   to   as   Claims   Tribunal)   for   such area as may be specified in the notification for the purpose   of   adjudicating   upon   claims   for compensation in respect of accidents involving the death of, or bodily injury to, persons arising out of the   use   of   motor   vehicles,   or   damages   to   any property of a third party so arising, or both…..” The aforesaid provision makes it vivid that the tribunal can adjudicate   the   claims   for  compensation  in  respect  of  accidents arising   out   of   use   of   motor   vehicles.     Thus,   the   fundamental requirement is that the accident should arise out of the use of the  motor vehicle.   If there is no use of the motor vehicle, the question of vehicular accident will not arise.

8. In this context, reference to certain definitions, as stated in the dictionary clause would be apt.  Section 2(28) defines ‘motor vehicle’ or ‘vehicle’. It reads as follows:­ “(28)   “motor   vehicle”   or   “vehicle”   means   any mechanically propelled vehicle adapted for use upon roads   whether   the   power   of   propulsion   is transmitted   thereto   from   an   external   or   internal source and includes a chassis to which a body has not   been   attached   and   a   trailer;   but   does   not include   a   vehicle   running   upon   fixed   rails   or   a vehicle of a special type adapted for use only in a factory   or   in   any   other   enclosed   premises   or   a vehicle   having   less   than   four   wheels   fitted   with engine   capacity   of   not   exceeding   twenty­five   cubic centimeters;"

Section 2(44) defines ‘tractor’ to mean a motor vehicle which is not itself constructed to carry any load (other than equipment used for the purpose of propulsion); but excludes a road­roller.
9. Keeping the aforesaid definitions in view, we are required to analyze whether the use of the vehicle in the manner in which it is done can be treated as use of the vehicle to cause a vehicular accident.   This Court in  Shivaji Dayanu Patil and another v. Smt.   Vatschala   Uttam   More1  was   dealing   with   conceptual meaning of the phrase “arising out of the use of motor vehicle” as   contained   in   Section   92­A   of   the   Motor   Vehicles   Act,   1939 (hereinafter referred to as ‘the 1939 Act’). We may note with profit that Section 92­A(1) used the words “an accident arising out of the use of a motor vehicle” and Section 165 of the Act that has been reproduced hereinabove also uses the words “arising out of the use of motor vehicles”. Thus, there has been no change in this part of the provision. 

10. In Patil’s case, there was a collision between a petrol tanker and a tractor on the national highway as a result of which, the petrol tanker went off the road and fell on its left side as a result of   its   turning   turtle,   the   petrol   contained   in   it   leaked   out   and collected nearby.  The accident took place at about 3 a.m. and at about 7.15 a.m. an explosion took place in the said petrol tanker resulting   in   fire   and   the   persons   who  had  assembled  near   the 1 (1991) 3 SCC 530 tanker   sustained   injuries   and   one   of   them   succumbed   to   the injuries.   On a claim petition being filed, the tribunal dismissed the same on the ground that the explosion could not be said to be an accident arising out of the use of the petrol tanker and that the provision of Section 92­A of the 1939 Act were not attracted. It expressed the view that the accident that took place at 7.15 a.m. was an independent explosion. On appeal, the learned single Judge of the High Court held that though at the material time the tanker was not being driven on the highway and was lying turtle on   its   side   on   the   highway   but   it   would   be   covered   by   the expression ‘use’ as contemplated in Section 92­A of the 1939 Act. In   Letters   Patent   Appeal,   the   Division   Bench   opined   that   the expression ‘use’ of motor vehicle covers a very wide field, a field more   extensive   than   which   might   be   called   traffic   use   of   the motor vehicle and that the use of a vehicle is not confined to the periods when it was in motion or was moving and that a vehicle would   still   be   in   use   even   when   it   was   stationary.   It   had   also expressed the view that it could not be inferred that there was no causal relation between the earlier event and the later incident of explosion   and   fire   and   further,   the   earlier   collision   if   not   the cause,   was   at   least   the   main   contributory   factor   for   the subsequent   explosion.   Being   of   this   view,   the   Division   Bench affirmed the judgment of the learned single Judge. 

11. This Court referred to the Statement of Objects and Reasons for   introduction   of   Section   92­A   to   Section   92­E   of   the   Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 1982. Analyzing, Chapter VII­A of the 1939   Act   which   was   amended   by   Act   47   of   1982   dealt   with “Liability without fault in certain cases”,   the Court referred to the anatomy of Section 92­A, the purpose behind it, the concept of   beneficial   legislation   and   proceeded   to   interpret   the   words ‘arising out of the use of motor vehicle’. Be it noted, on behalf of the petitioners therein, a contention was raised that the tanker had   ceased   to   be   a   mechanically   propelled   vehicle.   The   Court relied on the decision in Newberry v. Simmonds2 wherein it was held   that   the   motor   car   does   not   cease   to   be   a   mechanically propelled   vehicle   upon   the   mere   removal   of   the   engine   if   the evidence   admits   the   possibility   that   engine   may   shortly   be replaced   and   the   moving   power   restored.     The   Court   further referred to the authority in Smart v. Allan3 where the defendant had brought a car for £ 2 and subsequently sold it as scrap for 30 cents. It was found that the engine was in a rusty condition 2 [1961] 2 ALL ER 318 3 [1962] 3 ALL ER 893 and was incomplete and it did not work, and there was no gear­ box   or   electric   batteries;   and   the   car   was   incapable   of   moving under its own power, having been towed from place to place and that   it   could   only   have   been   put   in   running   order   again   by supplying   a   considerable   number   of   spare   parts   and   effecting considerable repairs, the cost of which would have been out of all proportion   to   its   value.   It   was   contended   before   the   House   of Lords  that  every  vehicle  which starts its life as a mechanically propelled vehicle remains as such until it is physically destroyed. The   said   submission   was   rejected   by   Lord   Parker,   CJ   who observed thus:­ “…   it   seems   to   me   as   a   matter   of   common   sense that some limit must be put, and some stage must be reached, when one can say: ‘This is so immobile that   it   has   ceased   to   be   a   mechanically   propelled vehicle’. Where, as in the present case, and unlike Newberry   v.   Simmonds,   there   is   no   reasonable prospect   of   the   vehicle   ever   being   made   mobile again, it seems to me that, at any rate at that stage, a vehicle has ceased to be a mechanically propelled vehicle.” This   Court   agreed   with   the   aforesaid   formulation   and reasoning and came to hold that the petrol tanker had not ceased to be a motor vehicle.  

12. The two­Judge Bench thereafter proceeded to interpret the expression   ‘use   of   the   motor   vehicle’,   for   it   was   urged   that   a vehicular   accident   could   only   take   place   when   the   vehicle   is mobile.   

13. Learned counsel for the petitioner therein urged for placing a narrow meaning on the word ‘use’ by confining it to a situation only when the vehicle is mobile.  On behalf of the respondent, it was suggested that a wider connotation for the word ‘use’ should be   taken   so   as   to   include   the   period   when   the   vehicle   is stationary.   On behalf of the respondents, observations made in Elliott v. Grey4,  Government Insurance Office of New South Wales v. R.J. Green & Lloyd Pty. Ltd.5, Pushpa Rani Chopra v.   Anokha   Singh6,  General   Manager,   K.S.R.T.C.   v.   S. Satalingappa7   and  Oriental Fire and General Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Suman Navnath Rajguru8 were pressed into service. The Court, after referring to the decisions cited by the respondent and the analysis made by the High Court, opined:­ “26.  …In our  opinion, the word “use” has a wider connotation to cover the period when the vehicle is not   moving   and   is   stationary   and   the   use   of   a vehicle   does   not   cease   on   account   of   the   vehicle 4 [1960] 1 QB 367 : [1959] 3 All ER 733 5 (1965) 114 CLR 437 6 1975 ACJ 396 (Del HC) 7 1979 ACJ 452 (Kant HC) 8 1985 ACJ 243 (Bom HC) having   been   rendered   immobile   on   account   of   a breakdown or mechanical defect or accident. In the circumstances,   it   cannot   be   said   that   the   petrol tanker was not in the use at the time when it was lying on its side after the collision with the truck.”

14. After so holding, the Court proceeded to consider whether explosion   and   fire   which   caused   injuries   to   the   insured   and eventual death of one could be said to have taken place due to an accident arising out of the use of the motor vehicle, i.e., the petrol tanker.   In   that   context,   the   question   of   causal   relationship between the user of the motor vehicle and the accident which has resulted in death or disablement arose.  Be it stated, the stand of the   petitioner   that   the   deceased   and   the   injured   persons   were engaged in pilferage of petrol and the explosion of fire took place because  of  the  unlawful  activities was negatived as the finding recorded by the tribunal on the said score had been overturned by the learned Single Judge whose view had been approved by the appellate Bench of the High Court.

15. The Court referred to Heyman v. Darwins Ltd.9, Union of India v. E.B. Aaby’s Rederi A/S10  and  Samick Lines Co. Ltd. v. Owners of the Antonis P. Lemos 11 and thereafter adverted to 9  [1942] AC 356 : [1942] 1 All ER 337 10 [1975] AC 797 : [1974] 2 All ER 874 11 [1985] 2 WLR 468 the decision of the High Court of Australia in  R.J. Green Case wherein Lord Barwick, C.J. has stated:­ “Bearing in mind the general purpose of the Act I think the expression ‘arising out of’ must be taken to   require   a   less   proximate   relationship   of   the injury   to   the   relevant   use   of   the   vehicle   than   is required to satisfy the words ‘caused by’. It may be that an association of the injury with the use of the vehicle   while   it  cannot  be said that that use was causally related to the injury may yet be enough to satisfy the expression ‘arise out of’ as used in the Act and in the policy.”   The observation of Windeyer, J. that was reproduced by the Court is to the following effect:­ “The words ‘injury caused by or arising out of the use   of   the   vehicle’   postulate   a   causal   relationship between   the   use   of   the   vehicle   and   the   injury. ‘Caused   by’   connotes   a   ‘direct’   or   ‘proximate’ relationship   of   cause   and   effect.   ‘Arising   out   of’ extends this to a result that is less immediate; but it still carries a sense of consequence.”

16. The two­Judge Bench, appreciating the wider connotation, proceeded to lay down:­ “36.  This   would   show   that   as   compared   to   the expression “caused by”, the expression “arising out of” has a wider connotation. The expression “caused by” was used in Sections 95(1)(b)(i) and (ii) and 96(2)

(b)(ii)   of   the   Act.   In   Section   92­A,   Parliament, however,   chose   to   use   the   expression   “arising   out of” which indicates that for the purpose of awarding compensation   under   Section   92­A,   the   causal relationship   between   the   use   of   the   motor   vehicle and   the   accident   resulting   in   death   or   permanent disablement   is   not   required   to   be   direct   and proximate and it can be less immediate. This would imply   that   accident   should   be   connected   with   the use   of   the   motor   vehicle   but   the   said   connection need not be direct and immediate. This construction of the expression “arising out of the use of a motor vehicle”   in   Section   92­A   enlarges   the   field   of protection   made   available   to   the   victims   of   an accident   and   is   in   consonance   with   the   beneficial object underlying the enactment.”

17. Thereafter, the Division Bench posed the question, whether the accident involving explosion and fire in the petrol tanker was connected with the use of tanker as a motor vehicle.  Concurring with the view of the High Court, it ruled:­ “37. …In our view, in the facts and circumstances of the present case, this question must be answered in the affirmative. The High Court has found that the tanker   in   question   was   carrying   petrol   which   is   a highly   combustible   and   volatile   material   and   after the collision with the other motor vehicle the tanker had fallen on one of its sides on the sloping ground resulting in escape of highly inflammable petrol and that there was grave risk of explosion and fire from the petrol coming out of the tanker.  In the light of the  aforesaid circumstances the learned Judges of the   High   Court   have   rightly   concluded   that   the collision between the tanker  and the other vehicle which had occurred earlier and the escape of petrol from   the   tanker   which   ultimately   resulted   in   the explosion and fire were not unconnected but related events   and   merely   because   there   was   interval   of about four to four and half hours between the said collision and the explosion and fire in the tanker, it cannot   be   necessarily   inferred   that   there   was   no causal   relation   between   explosion   and   fire.  In   the circumstances,   it   must  be  held  that   the  explosion and   fire   resulting   in   the   injuries   which   led  to   the death of Deepak Uttam More was due to an accident arising out of the use of the motor vehicle viz. the petrol tanker No. MKL 7461.” [Emphasis supplied] The aforesaid analysis throws immense light to understand the concept of “related events” and “causal relation”. They have been   distinguished   from   an   event   which   is   not   connected. Needless to say, the appreciation of causal relation is a question of fact in each case and is to be weighed and appreciated on the basis of the materials brought on record. 

18. In Union of India v. United India Insurance Co. Ltd. and others12, a two­Judge Bench has opined that the words ‘use of the   motor   vehicle’   is   to  be  construed in  a wider  manner.   The learned Judges referred to the decision in  Patil’s  case wherein reference was made to the Australian case in R.J. Green (supra) and to the observations of Lord Barwick, C.J. that those words have   to   be   widely   construed.   The   Court,   in   the   latter   case, referred to the observations of Windeyer, J. in R.J. Green’s case which read thus:­   “… no sound reason was given for restricting the phrase, ‘the use of a motor vehicle’ in this way. The 12 (1997) 8 SCC 683 only limitation upon it … that I can see is that the injury must be one  in any way a consequence of a use of the vehicles as a motor vehicle.” The   aforesaid   passage   emphasizes   on   “consequence   of   a use”. It is equated with a “related event”. 

19. The aforesaid view has been reiterated in Samir Chanda v. Managing Director, Assam State Transport Corporation13.  In the   said   case,   a   bomb   exploded   inside   the   bus   as   a   result   of which the appellant sustained serious injuries on his legs.   The tribunal passed an award in favour of the claimant.   In appeal preferred by the respondent, the High Court, while not disturbing the finding of the tribunal on facts, expressed the view that there was no negligence on the part of the owner or the driver of the vehicle and, therefore, the question of paying compensation did not arise.  This Court referred to Patil’s case and placing reliance on the same, opined:­ “14. … The explosion took place inside the bus is an admitted  fact  and  the usual police escort was not there. The High Court, except observing that there was no negligence, has not upset the finding of the Tribunal that the atmosphere during the period of accident was so polluted requiring care on the part of   the   conductor   and the  driver  of  the bus. There cannot be any doubt that the accident arose out of 13 (1998) 6 SCC 605 the use of the motor vehicle justifying the claim of the appellant.” 

20.   The decision in  United India Insurance Co. Ltd.  (supra) has ruled that if it is ultimately found that there is no negligence on the part of the driver of the vehicle or there is no defect in the vehicle but the accident is only due to the sole negligence of the other parties/agencies, then on that finding, the claim would go out   of   Section   110(1)   of   the   1939   Act   because   the   case   would then become one of exclusive negligence of the Railways. Again if the   accident   had   arisen   only   on   account   of   the   negligence   of persons   other   than   the   driver/owner   of   the   motor   vehicle,   the claim would not be maintainable before the tribunal.