Madan B. Lokur, J.

1. The facts revealed during the hearing of these writ petitions filed Signature Not Verified Digitally signed by SANJAY KUMAR Date: 2017.08.02 under Article 32 of the Constitution suggest a mining scandal of enormous 10:54:24 IST Reason:

proportions and one involving megabucks. Lessees in the districts of W.P. (C) Nos. 114/2014 etc.  Keonjhar, Sundergarh and Mayurbhanj in Odisha have rapaciously mined iron ore and manganese ore, apparently destroyed the environment and forests and perhaps caused untold misery to the tribals in the area. However, to be fair to the lessees, they did the detail steps taken to ameliorate the hardships of the tribals, but it appears to us that their contribution is perhaps not more than a drop in the ocean – also too little, too late. Facts leading up to the report of the Central Empowered Committee

2. Rabi Das, the editor of a daily newspaper called Ama Rajdhani filed I.A. No. 2746-2748 of 2009 in a pending writ petition being T.N. Godavarman v. Union of India.1 He prayed, inter alia, for the following directions from this Court:

“ a) Issue a direction to the Central Empowered Committee to conduct an exhaustive fact finding study of the illegal mining in Keonjhar, Sundargarh and other Districts of Orissa;
b) Direct appointment of a “Commission” to investigate and study the modalities of the illegal machinations, fix responsibility on individuals (in Government and outside it) and recommend remedial measures to be immediately implemented by the Government of India and the Government of Orissa;
c) Direct the Respondents to take effective and appropriate action to ensure closure/stoppage of all the illegal mining activities in the concerned areas and direct prosecution and punish all those found guilty of this illegal mining in violation of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) W.P. (C) Nos. 114/2014 etc.  Act, 1957, Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 and other relevant laws.”

3. The applications were taken up for consideration on 6 th November, 2009 when notice was issued to the Central Empowered Committee (for short ‘the CEC’) to file its report/response within six weeks.

4. On 26th April, 2010 the CEC submitted an interim report which was noted by this Court and taken on record. The report was of a general nature but contained quite a few recommendations. Some of the recommendations presently relevant are as follows:

“(b) Even otherwise the Rule 24-A(6), MCR, 1960 does not authorize the lessee to operate a mine without the statutory clearances/approvals. Therefore, in respect of a mine covered under the ‘deemed extension’ clause, the mining operations should be permitted to be undertaken in the non forest area of the mining lease only if (i) it has the requisite environmental clearance; (ii) it has the consent to operate from the State Pollution Control Board under the Air and Water Acts; (iii) Mining Plan is duly approved by the competent authority; and (iv) the NPV for the entire forest falling within the mining lease is deposited in the Compensatory Afforestation Fund.
The mining in the forest land included in the mining lease should be permissible only if, in addition to the above, the approval under the FC Act/TWP has been obtained;
(c) No forest land can be leased/assigned without first obtaining the approval under the FC Act. Therefore, the forest area approved under the FC Act should not be lesser than the total forest area included in the mining leases approved under the MMDR Act, 1957. Both necessarily have to be the same. In view of the above, this Hon’ble Court while permitting grant of Temporary Working Permission to the mines in Orissa and Goa has made it one of the pre-conditions that the NPV will be paid for the entire forest area included in the mining W.P. (C) Nos. 114/2014 etc.  leases. Similarly, all the mining lease holders in Orissa should be directed to pay the NPV for the entire forest area, included in the mining lease;

(d) In Orissa, substantial areas included in the mining leases as non forest land have subsequently been identified as DLC forest (deemed forest/forest like areas) by the Expert Committee constituted by the State Government pursuant to this Hon’ble Court’s order dated 12.12.1996. While processing and/or approving the proposals under the FC Act in many cases such areas have been treated as non-forest land. It is recommended that (i) the NPV for the entire DLC area included in the mining lease, after deducting the NPV already paid, should be deposited by the concerned lease holder and

(ii) the mining operations in the unbroken DLC land (virgin land) should be permissible only if the permission under the FC Act has been obtained/is obtained for such area. Keeping in view the peculiar circumstances as was existing in Orissa and subject to the above, the mining operations in the broken DLC land may be allowed to be continued provided the other statutory requirements and Rules are otherwise being complied with.” The report concluded by recording as follows:

“ a) an attempt has been made for the first time by the CEC to comply and analyse the status of all the mining leases in a State and to suggest effective and remedial measures -
something made possible because of the unstinted cooperation extended by the senior functionaries of the Forest and Mines Departments of the State Government; and

b) the above recommendations if accepted and implemented will, besides ensuring that mining is done in compliance with the statutory provisions, result in recovery of additional amount towards the NPV etc. running into hundreds of crores of rupees. It would be appropriate that a part of this additional amount, say 50% is used through a SPV for undertaking specific tribal welfare and area development works so as to ensure inclusive growth of the mineral bearing areas. The CEC proposes to file detailed schemes in this regard for seeking permission of this Hon’ble Court provided the State W.P. (C) Nos. 114/2014 etc.  of Orissa as well as the MoEF endorse the course of action proposed above.” The significance of the second conclusion will be discussed by us a little later.

5. Notice was issued on the report returnable on 7th May, 2010. On the adjourned date, the following order was passed by this Court:

“The CEC has filed its Report. The State would like to file its response. Six weeks time is granted for the same. The recommendations of the CEC which are acceptable to the State Government can be complied with.” It may be mentioned that some of the recommendations made by the CEC have been accepted and implemented by the State of Odisha.
6. The issue of mining in Odisha again came up for consideration on 16 th September, 2013 and this Court passed the following order:

“We call for a report from the Central Empowered Committee within a period of six weeks. We direct that the parties of the State Government of Odisha and the Central Government will cooperate with the Central Empowered Committee to enquire into the matter and furnish a report.
The matter be listed on a Monday after six weeks.”
7. With reference to the order passed on 16th September, 2013 the CEC conducted an inquiry and some information was sought from M/s Sarda Mines Private Limited (for short ‘SMPL’). This was objected to by SMPL W.P. (C) Nos. 114/2014 etc.  who filed an application which was taken up for consideration on 9 th December, 2013. The following order was passed on that day:

“By our order dated 16th September, 2013, we had called for a Report from the Central Empowered Committee within a period of six weeks. It is stated on behalf of the Central Empowered Committee that the Report could not be ready as part of the information called for have not been furnished by the State Government.
Mr. Venugopal, learned senior counsel for the applicant M/s. Sarda Mines Private Limited in IA No.3721 submits that since some of the matters are pending before the High Court, a prayer has been made for not furnishing the required information to the Central Empowered Committee.
List this matter in the second week of January, 2014.
In the meantime, the Central Empowered Committee may not submit its final Report.”
8. The matter was again taken up on 13 th January, 2014 and this Court passed the following order:

“We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
We have also perused the letter dated 17 th October, 2013 of the Member Secretary, Central Empowered Committee sent to the Chief Secretary, Government of Odisha along with its annexures and in particular, the Statement of Details of information and documents sought by Central Empowered Committee for the meeting convened on 30th October, 2013, which cover forest and environmental issues.
We, accordingly, modify the order dated 9th December, 2013 and direct the Central Empowered Committee to submit its final report on the queries made by the State Government with regard to the details of the documents sought for in the letter dated 17 th October, 2013 within a period of six weeks.
W.P. (C) Nos. 114/2014 etc.  The Report will not cover cases other than forest and environmental issues.

The lessees and others from whom information is sought for will cooperate if they do not cooperate the Central Empowered Committee will give its report.

A copy of the interim report of 26th April, 2010 will be furnished to the learned counsel appearing for the State of Odisha. This matter be listed on 20th January, 2014 for consideration of the recommendations made by the Central Empowered Committee in the said Report dated 26th April, 2010.” Thereafter and partly based on reports given by Justice M.B. Shah, a retired judge of this Court, holding a commission under the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952 a writ petition being W.P. (C) No. 114 of 2014 was filed by Common Cause. Several prayers were made in the writ petition, and some of the more significant prayers read as follows:-

“(a) Issue a writ of mandamus or any other appropriate writ directing the Union of India and Government of Odisha to immediately stop forthwith all illegal mining in the State of Odisha and to terminate all leases that are found to be involved in illegal mining and mining in violation of the provisions of the Forest Conservation Act 1980, the environment laws and other laws.
(b) Issue a writ of mandamus or any other appropriate writ directing the Union of India and Government of Odisha to take action against all the violators involved either directly or indirectly in illegal mining including those named in the report of Justice Shah Commission.
(c) Issue a writ of mandamus or any other appropriate writ directing a thorough investigation by an SIT or CBI under the supervision of this Hon’ble Court, as is recommended by the Justice W.P. (C) Nos. 114/2014 etc.  Shah Commission into illegal mining in Odisha and collusion between private companies/individuals and public officials of the State/Central Governments.

                   xxx             xxx            xxx

                   (e)      Issue a writ of mandamus or any other appropriate writ
directing the respondents to recover the illegally accumulated wealth through illegal mining and related activity, as per Section 21(5) of the MMDR Act, 1957 [Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957] and launch prosecutions under Section 21(1) of the MMDR Act 1957, and direct that the money recovered would be used for the welfare of local communities, tribals and villagers.”

9. The writ petition was taken up for consideration on 21 st April, 2014 when the following order was passed:

“We have heard the preliminary objections with regard to the writ petition and we are not convinced that the writ petition is not maintainable.
Issue notice.
As the State of Odisha, Union of India and the CEC have already been served with the notices, no further notices be issued to them.
Notice, however, be issued to respondent nos. 4 and 5 returnable within four weeks.
It appears from the averments in paragraph 14 of the writ petition that several lessees are operating without clearances under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 and the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, and without renewal by the Government. Hence, an interim order needs to be passed in respect of these lessees who are operating the leases in violation of the law.
For consideration of the interim order that should be passed, only this writ petition be listed next Monday, the 28th of April, 2014, as first item. It will be open for all parties and intervenors/proposed intervenors to file their respective affidavits.
W.P. (C) Nos. 114/2014 etc.  CEC, in the meanwhile, will make out a list of such lessees who are operating the leases in violation of the law. This list be prepared by the CEC without reference to the Shah Commission’s Report. Liberty is given to the parties to produce their papers before CEC. The State of Odisha and the Union of India will cooperate with CEC to prepare the list.” Report of the Central Empowered Committee

10. The CEC gave its final report on 25 th April, 2014 which was considered by this Court and a detailed interim order was passed on 16 th May, 2014.2 The sum and substance of the final report dated 25th April, 2014 and the interim order is that in the districts of Odisha that we are concerned with, namely, Keonjhar, Sundergarh and Mayurbhanj, the total number of leases granted for mining iron and manganese ore are 187. Of these, 102 lease holders did not have requisite environmental clearance (under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986) or approval under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 or approved mining plan and/or Consent to Operate under the provisions of the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 or the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981. This Court directed that mining operations in these 102 mining leases shall remain suspended but it will be open to such lease holders to move the concerned authorities for necessary clearances, approvals or consents and “as and when the mining lessees are able to obtain all the 2 Common Cause v. Union of India & Ors. (2014) 14 SCC 155 W.P. (C) Nos. 114/2014 etc.  clearances/approvals/consent they may move this Court for modification of this interim order in relation to their cases.”

11. This Court also found that 29 out of 187 mining leases had been determined or rejected or had lapsed. It was directed that mining operations in these 29 mining leases will also remain suspended but it would be open to all these concerned lessees to move the authorities for necessary relief and as and when they get the appropriate relief, they could move this Court for modification of the interim order.

12. This Court also found that 53 iron ore/manganese ore mining leases were operational and that they had necessary approvals under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, consent to operate granted by the Odisha State Pollution Control Board and also approved mining plans. (There is no specific mention about environmental clearance). In addition 3 mining leases were located in forest as well as non-forest land, but mining operations were being conducted in non-forest areas of the mining lease as the lease holders did not have approvals under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980. Therefore a total of 56 iron ore/manganese ore mining leases were operating in the State of Odisha.

13. As far as the break-up of the 56 operational mining leases is concerned, it was found that 14 mining leases were operating on first renewal basis in W.P. (C) Nos. 114/2014 etc.  accordance with the deeming provisions of Section 8(2) of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 (for short ‘the MMDR Act’) read with Rule 24-A(6) of the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 (for short ‘the MCR’) and 16 mining leases were operating since lease deeds for grant of renewal had been executed in their favour. The remaining 26 mining leases were operating on second and subsequent renewal basis with the renewal applications pending a final decision with the State Government.

14. In respect of the 14 first renewal mining leases, this Court permitted them to continue their operations for the time being in view of the deemed renewal provisions. This Court also permitted 16 mining leases to continue to operate since they had lease deeds executed in their favour. With regard to the remaining 26 mining leases operating on second and subsequent renewal applications, this Court drew attention to the decision rendered on 21 st April, 2014 in Goa Foundation v. Union of India3 wherein it was held that the provision for a second or subsequent deemed renewal was not available in view of Section 8(3) of the MMDR Act. Consequently, these 26 lease holders were restrained from operating until express orders were passed by the State Government under Section 8(3) of the MMDR Act. Six months time was granted to the State Government to take a final decision on the 3 (2014) 6 SCC 590 W.P. (C) Nos. 114/2014 etc.  renewal applications. This Court left it open to the mining lease holders to apply for modification of the interim order dated 16 th May, 2014 on obtaining necessary clearances.

15. During the hearing of these petitions, we were informed that the balance 26 mining leases are now operational in view of the amendment to Section 8(3) of the MMDR Act with effect from 12 th January, 2015. However, we are not aware whether these 26 mining leases have the necessary statutory clearances.

16. We may also mention that pursuant to the liberty granted to move for modification of the interim order of 16 th May, 2014 we have received 17 interim applications for modification. Through a chart handed over to us in Court on 3rd May, 2017 we have been informed that in respect of two of the 17 applications, that is, Zenith Mining (I.A. No. 45) and Kavita Agrawal (I.A. No. 47), the lease has not been extended or has been determined and they do not have any Environmental Clearance or Forest Clearance. In respect of J.N. Pattnaik (I.A. No. 66), there is no Forest Clearance available. We were also informed that S.A. Karim (I.A. No.9) actually had a working lease and had wrongly been included as a non-operational lease. W.P. (C) Nos. 114/2014 etc.
 17. Be that as it may, learned counsel for the lease holders drew our attention to the record of proceedings of 16th May, 2014 and particularly the following paragraph appearing therein:

“We have passed interim order in a separate sheet. The Central Empowered Committee will give a final report on the Writ Petition by the end of July, 2014 and the matter will be listed in the first week of August, 2014 before the Green Bench.” We are mentioning this in the context of the order passed on 13 th January, 2014 adverted to above to the effect that “The Report will not cover cases other than forest and environmental issues.”
18. In its final report, the CEC has dealt with the following ten topics: In this final report dated the CEC dealt with the following ten topics:-

“I. Production of iron ore and manganese ore without/in excess of the environmental clearance/Mining Plan/Consent to Operate.
II. Mining leases operated in violation of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.
III. Illegal mining outside the sanctioned mining lease areas.
IV. Mining leases acquired in violation of Section 6 of the MMDR Act, 1957.
V. Violation of Rule 37 of the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 by the lessees.
VI. Illegalities involved in the mining leases of Essel Mining & Industries Ltd.
W.P. (C) Nos. 114/2014 etc.  VII. Illegalities involved in the mining lease of Sharda Mines (P) Ltd.

VIII. Massive illegal mining in Uliburu Forest land. IX. Inordinate delays in taking decisions by the State Government regarding renewal of the mining leases.

X. Other issues.”

19. By an order dated 16th January, 2015 objections to the final report were permitted and we have since received quite a few objections. When the matter was taken up for consideration by this Court on 7th October, 2015 and pursuant to the order passed on that date, the learned Amicus filed a statement dated 30th October, 2015 in a tabular form dealing with each I.A. filed in respect of the observations and recommendations made by CEC. Thereafter, when the matter was again taken up for consideration the learned Amicus filed a note dated 15th March, 2016 wherein the following four issues were flagged:-

“(i) Leases lapsed under Section 4A(4) of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 (hereinafter referred to as MMDR Act, 1957) (11 leases);
(ii) Violation of Rule 24 of the Minerals (other than Atomic and Hydrocarbons Energy Minerals) Concession Rules, 2016 (hereinafter referred to as MCR, 2016) and Rule 37 of the Mineral Concessions Rules, 1960 (hereinafter referred to as MCR, 1960) (9 leases);
(iii) Illegal mining in forest lands (20 leases); and W.P. (C) Nos. 114/2014 etc.
 (iv) Iron ore produced without/in excess of the environmental clearance (each of the operating leases involved).”

20. Insofar as the first issue is concerned, it is common ground that that issue has been fully, conclusively and exhaustively dealt with by this Court by a judgment and order dated 4 th April, 2016 (Common Cause v. Union of India).4 Therefore, the first issue does not survive for consideration by us.

21. As far as the remaining three issues are concerned, these overlap with topics I, II and V dealt with by the CEC. Detailed submissions were made before us by learned counsel for all the appearing parties on these issues as well as by the learned Amicus and the learned Attorney General. We propose to deal with them in this judgment and order.

22. We may mention that submissions were also made on topics III and IV identified by the CEC, that is, illegal mining outside the sanctioned mining lease areas and mining leases acquired in violation of Section 6 of the MMDR Act. We will consider these issues as well.

23. As far as topics VI and VII identified by the CEC are concerned, we would like to hear the parties in detail in respect of these issues.

24. No challenges or submissions were made on topics VIII, IX and X and therefore we accept the report of the CEC on these topics. 4 (2016) 11 SCC 455 W.P. (C) Nos. 114/2014 etc.
 25. At this stage, we may mention some rather frightening figures mentioned by the CEC in its final report. According to the CEC, excess mining without environmental clearance or beyond what was authorized by the environmental clearance is 2130.988 lakh MT of iron ore and 24.129 lakh MT of manganese ore making a total of 2155.117 lakh MT of iron and manganese ore. This does not include extraction of ore without forest clearance. These figures give an indication of the extent of excess or illegal or unlawful mining carried out.