1. Brief facts of the present case are that on 12.07.2013, the petitioner filed a petition Under Section 14 (1) (a) (b) of the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 (hereinafter referred to as 'DRC Act') praying to this court to pass an order for eviction in respect of private tin shed No. 12 measuring 25 sq. yards forming part of property No. 8-A, Tatarpur, Main Najafgarh Road, Tagore Garden, New Delhi as shown red in the site plan attached with the petition (hereinafter referred to as "Tenanted Premises").

2. The case of the petitioner is that father of the petitioner had been the owner/landlord of property bearing No. 8-A, Tatarpur, Main Najafgarh Road, Tagore Garden, New Delhi- 110027, who unfortunately expired leaving behind two sons and one daughter. The petitioner being one of the owners of the property is competent and powerful for filing the present petition. That the respondents no.1 and 2 are the real brothers and were inducted as tenants by Sh. Jagdish Chand Gupta in private tin shed No. 12 in property No. 8-A, measuring about 25 sq. yards at Tatarpur, Main Najafgarh Road, Tagore Garden, New Delhi-110027. That the rate of rent has been settled at Rs.125/- per month excluding electricity and other charges. The electricity connection was installed in the tenanted premises in the name of respondent No.2 which is lying disconnected. That the respondents without the written consent and permission of the father of the petitioner had created a sub-lettee who is owner of several rickshaws and the respondents against the huge amount had permitted to park the rickshaws in the tenanted premises as well as in the passage. The owner of rickshaws used to lock down and open the tenanted premises with his own keys. The respondents have also created a further sub-letting who is running the scrap business. The respondents further created the sub-letting on the entrance of the passage wherein a sub-lettee namely Sh. Avinash Kumar is running the business of car repairing, denting of auto vehicles and welding work. After the death of the petitioner, the respondents also parted with the possession of tenanted premises for one Sh. Manoj Sharma, Advocate, who had installed his sign board in the beginning of passage of tenanted premises. That the petitioner sent and served a legal notice dated 13.01.2020 calling thereby the respondents to make payments of arrears of rent mentioned. The respondents neither complied with the requisitions of the notice nor sent the reply. The petitioner having no alternative filed an eviction petition against the respondents on the ground of non-payment of rent as well as sub-letting. However, the respondents entered into a compromise with the petitioner. The running case against the respondents was discontinued by the petitioner. That since the respondents backed out from their commitment. The petitioner having no alternative again issued a legal notice dated 12.03.2013 against the respondents through registered A.D. post. The respondents despite the service of the notice dated 12.03.2013 have failed to comply with the legal notice. Respondents despite the service of the notice has neither complied with the requisitions of the notice nor has replied the same.

Lastly, it is prayed by the petitioner that an eviction order may be passed in favour of the petitioner and against the respondents.

3. On the other hand, Written Statement was filed by the respondents in response to the petition filed by the petitioner U/S 14 (1) (a) (b) of the DRC Act, praying to the court to dismiss the present petition with costs.

In their Written Statement, the respondents have inter-alia submitted that the present petition is hit by the provisions of "res-judicata" as the petitioner had earlier filed a petition U/S 14(1) of DRC Act which was dismissed in default by the court of Sh. Devinder Kumar, Ld. Predecessor of this Court vide order dated 23.05.2012 in eviction petition No. E-203/11. The property in question belongs to Delhi Development Authority and the matter is still pending before the court of Sh. Rakesh Siddhartha, Ld. ASJ Delhi for adjudication against the order passed by the court of SDM Rampura U/S 133 CrPC. That the present petition is hit by the provisions of Section 41(h) and (i) of the Specific Relief Act as the petitioner has not sought efficacious remedies available to him. That there is no relationship of landlord and tenant between the parties. It is the DDA who is the owner of the premises in question to whom the respondents have been paying damages regularly. DDA on 01.08.1980 vide file No. D/Tatarpr/2/80 had taken a sum of Rs.1400/- from the respondents as damages being the unauthorized occupant of the DDA. The respondents are in possession of the premises and regularly making the a payment of Rs.1400/- towards annual damages. The DDA has also issued No vide letter no. D/Tatarpur/JUG/2/80 dated 8.01.1981 after which the electricity connection was got installed by the respondents. That the said Sh. Avinash Kumar is the real brother of the respondents and there is no question of any sub- letting. Earlier petition on the ground of non-payment was dismissed but the same was not got restored. There is no person by the name of Sh. Manoj Sharma, Advocate and the question of hanging of any sign board in his name did not arise at all. No notice of any kind whatsoever was ever served on the respondents. That there was no question of giving any undertaking or compromising the matter. Lastly, it is prayed by the respondents that the present petition being false and frivolous may be dismissed with costs.

4. Thereafter, replication was filed by the petitioner in which he submitted that the eviction bearing No. E-35/10 was at the stage of evidence. However, the respondents entered into a compromise as the preventive proceedings were initiated by SDM Rampura, Delhi and the respondents had given their undertaking to withdraw the sub-letting from the tenanted premises. Since the respondents had obeyed, performed and accepted the terms of compromise, the petitioner did not continue his earlier proceedings. However, the legal proceedings regarding S.D.M. Rampura, Delhi and the matter pending before Sh. Rakesh Sidhartha, Ld. A.S.J., Tis Hazari Courts, Delhi is a matter of record. It is specifically denied that DDA is the owner of the property in question. It is submitted that earlier, there had been the litigation between the father of the petitioner and the respondents and even the decree of eviction had been passed against the respondents.

5. Thereafter, the matter was fixed for Petitioner's Evidence. The petitioner examined himself as PW-1 and relied upon documents. Petitioner also examined PW2 Sh. Mukesh Kumar, JJA, Record Room (Civil), Tis Hazari Courts, Delhi, PW3 Sh. Mukesh Kumar, LDC, Property Tax Department (West Zone), 59 Block, Ashok Nagar, New Delhi and PW4 Sh. Jai Kumar, JJA, Record Room (Civil), Tis Hazari Court, Delhi. Thereafter, Petitioner's Evidence was closed.

On the other hand, respondent examined Sh. Ravi Kumar as RW-1, RW-2 Sh. Subhash Chander, RW3 Sh. Amit Mathur, Patwari, Land Management West Zone, Subhash Nagar, New Delhi-27 and RW4 Sh. Vivek Choudhary, Asstt. Section Officer, Damage Land Management Coordination, INA, Vikas Sadan, Delhi. Thereafter, respondent's evidence was closed.

6. I have heard the arguments advanced by Ld. Counsel for the petitioner but despite repeated ample opportunites given to to Ld. Counsel for respondents to argue the matter, he did not avail the opportunity. I have also gone through the entire record and case law relied upon. I have also carefully gone through the testimonies of the witnesses, documents and material on record.

7. It is pertinent to mention that although the present petition was filed U/S 14(1)(a) & (b) of DRC Act but on 15.02.2020, the relief U/S 14(1)(b) of DRC Act was withdrawn by the Ld. Counsel for the petitioner. As such, this court has to give the finding only on U/S 14(1)(a) of DRC Act.

LAW ON SEC. 14(1) (a) D.R.C. ACT:-

8. It is expedient to reproduce the relevant provision of Delhi Rent Control Act so that position may be crystal clear:-

"Section-14. Protection of tenant against eviction- (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law or contract, no order or decree for the recovery of possession of any premises shall be made by court or any controller in favour of the landlord against a tenant:
Provided that the controller may, on an application made to him in the prescribed manner, make an order for recovery of possession of the premises on one or more of the following grounds only, namely:-
(a) that the tenant has neither paid nor tendered the whole arrears of the rent legally recoverable from him within two months of the day on which a notice of demand for the arrears of rent has been served of him by the landlord in the manner provided in Section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (4 of 1882)."
As such, the following are the ingredients of section 14(1) proviso (a) :-

(i) There should be a relationship of landlord and tenant between the parties.

(ii) There should be a non-payment or tendering of whole arrears of legally recoverable rent within two months of service of legal notice upon the tenant given by the landlord.

(i). RELATIONSHIP OF LANDLORD AND TENANT:-

9. Perusal of record shows that in the present case, petitioner has claimed to be landlord of the tenanted premises on the basis of landlord of his father Sh. Jagdish Chand Gupta.

On the contrary, the respondents have vehemently disputed the landlordship of the petitioner and also that of Sh. Jagdish Chand Gupta. The stand of the respondents is that DDA is the owner of the tenanted premises and they are paying damages to the DDA.

Perusal of record shows that petitioner has not placed on record any document of his ownership or the ownership of Sh. Jagdish Chand Gupta except Survey Report and judgments of some Courts.

10. I have carefully scrutinized the testimonies of all the witnesses including respondent no. 1 and respondent no. 2 which were examined as RW-1 and RW-2 respectively. It is expedient to reproduce the relevant portion of testimonies of RW-1 and RW-2 which is as under:-

RW-1 Sh. Ravi Kumar in his testimony states that:-
"The address which has been mentioned in my affidavit Ex.RW1/A is not my residential address. My residential address is E-668, Raghubir Nagar, New Delhi-27. The address in property No. 8A/12 has been allotted to me by the DDA. It is correct that in any document issued by the DDA to me address 8A/12 has not been mentioned. Vol. Only 8A Tatar Pur has been mentioned. The property no. 8A/12 has been written by us at our own. The fact that I am in possession of 400 sq. yards including 25 sq. yards which is subject matter of instant eviction petition might have mentioned in my W.S. W.S has been shown to the witness wherein the factum of 400 sq. yards has not been mentioned. I do not remember if I have any government or non-government document showing that I am in possession of 400 sq. yards land in property No. 8A/12, Tatar Pur, New Delhi. The damages receipt also does not show that I am in possession of 400 sq. yards. Vol. In damages receipt 35 sq. yards has been shown. I have never paid the damages against the possession of 400 sq. yards in property No. 8A/12. I do not remember if I have any document either from the office of MCD or from the court showing the possession of 400 sq. yards in property No. 8A/12. We had applied and filed my affidavit in the office of SDMC showing possession of 400 sq. yards. I have not filed that such document in the Court file. I entered into property bearing No. 8A Tatarpur, Delhi in the year 1980. We have encroached upon the land. I had filed a civil case against Sh. Jagdish Chand Gupta and DDA. The said case got dismissed in default due to my non- appearance. I did not get it restored till the date. To my knowledge I had shown myself as owner of the property. I do not remember if my brother Sh. Subhash and Sh. Avinash requested the DDA to get the 35 sq. yard divided into two portions. No damages receipt issued by the DDA is in my name. I have no document to show that I am paying the damages even for a sq. yard in property No. 8A, Tatar Pur, Delhi. It is correct that the document dated 08.01.1981 C/o Sh. Jagdish Chand Gupta has been mentioned. Vol. I do not know why the name of Sh. Jagdish Chander (father of petitioner No.1 has been mentioned in these documents). It is also correct that in the document dated 01.04.1982 C/o Sh. Jagdish Chander R/o 8A Tatarpur has been mentioned. Vol. I do not know why the name of Sh. Jagdish Chander (father of petitioner No.1 has been mentioned in these documents). It is also correct that document dated 29.03.1982 C/o Sh. Jagdish Chander R/o 8A Tatarpur has been mentioned. Vol. I do not know why the name of Sh. Jagdish Chander (father of petitioner No.1 has been mentioned in these documents). I recognised the signature of my brother Sh. Subhash Chand Sharma on application given by him to the Estate Officer and which is Ex.RW1/P1. It is wrong to suggest that my brother had given in writing by virtue of application Ex.RW1/P1 that he is the tenant of Sh. Jagdish Chand Gupta and he does have the rent receipt issued by Sh. Jagdish Chand Gupta by him in property No.8A in file No.D/Tatar Pur, 5/80, dated 15.09.1980. It is wrong to suggest that my brother Sh. Subhash Chand Sharma deliberately under malafide intentions has not filed the rent receipts issued by Sh. Jagdish Chand Gupta to him in respect of property No.8A/12. I do not know if in the DDA papers C/o Sh. Jagdish Chand Gupta has been mentioned as I and my brother Sh. Subhash Chand was the tenant of Sh. Jagdish Chand Gupta in property No.8A/12, Tatar Pur, Delhi. In the year 1980 my brother Sh. Subhash get the electricity connection installed however the same was disconnected due to non-payment of electricity charges. Vol. The petitioner got the same disconnected due to concealing of electricity bill. A new electricity connection has been installed in the name of my another brother Sh. Avinash Chander. My brother Sh. Avinash Chander is aware of this case since the very inception of pendency of this case. Sh. Jagdish Chand Gupta never issued any rent receipt in the name of Sh. Avinash Chander and me. It is wrong to suggest that my brother Sh. Subash Chander and me had been the tenant of Sh. Jagdish Chand Gupta in respect of 25 sq. yard in property No.8A/12, Tatarpur. It is wrong to suggest that we under our malafide intentions have not filed the rent receipts in this case. It is wrong to suggest that I am deposing falsely."
RW2 Sh. Subhash Chander in his evidence has deposed that:-

"The address which I have mentioned in the court in my examination in chief is not my residential address. E-668, Raghubir Nagar, New Delhi-27 is my residential address. The address 9/19, 8-A/12, Tatarpur, New Delhi-27 has been given by the father of the petitioner Sh. Jagdish Chand Gupta. I have filed the W.S in this case and I recognized my signature on the W.S at point A and point B. I do not know if the fact which I have mentioned in my affidavit Ex.RW2/A that I am in possession of 400 sq. yard has been mentioned in my W.S. or not. The witness has been shown his W.S. and after going through the W.S. it has been stated that still he does not know whether this fact has been mentioned in my W.S. or not. I do not know if the fact that the 400 sq. yards land situated at property No. 8-A, Tatarpur, Main Najafgarh Road, Tagore Garden, N.D is included 25 sq. yard which is subject matter of instant matter of eviction mentioned in my affidavit whether has been mentioned in my W.S. I do have the document of 400 sq. yards in my possession. I have not filed the said document in the court file. I have not mentioned anything in respect of said document in my W.S. The said document has been issued by the Court but I do not remember the designation of Hon'ble Court who issued the said document in the name of respondent no.1. It was the case of quarrel wherein the respondent no.1 and the petitioner were arrested. The said document was issued by that court. So far as my knowledge is concerned, my brother respondent no.1 have plead guilty and deposited the fine thereafter I do not know what happen in that case. I do not have any document in respect of the fact that 400 sq. yards was/is in my possession in Khasra No.9/19, 8-A/12, Tatarpur, Main Najafgarh Road, Tagore Garden, New Delhi-27. We entered in the suit property in the year 1980. I had taken the land in dispute from the father of the petitioner. Later on the DDA acquired the land after demolish the same. Suit property was also demolished. The incident of acquisition of the land as well as demolition is prior to 1980. The father of the petitioner had been issuing the rent receipts in my name. Sh. Jagdish Chand Gupta did not issue the rent receipt to me as DDA had demolished the premises in question. I also stopped paying the rent to the father of the petitioner after demolition of the property in question. The rent receipts issued by the father of the petitioner can not be available as by passage of time the same were got destroyed. I repossessed the property which was adjacent to the suit property. The property in repossession is included in property No.8-A, Tatarpur. After my repossession the father of the petitioner had instituted a law suit against me and respondent no.1 and in that proceedings the father of the petitioner had given the number of the suit property as 8-A/12. I can not tell whether the private number 8-A/12 given by the father of the petitioner was challenged by me. Vol. My brother/respondent no.1 can tell very fact. I do not remember the year and the relevant period when the father of the petitioner had instituted the law suit against us. I do not know what remained the fate of the case filed by the father of the petitioner. It is correct that I have no document issued by the DDA in which the suit property has been mentioned as 8- A/12, Tatarpur, Main Najafgarh Road. I have not filed any case against the father of the petitioner and after his death against the Legal heirs to declare that Sh. Jagdish Chand Gupta was not the owner of property no.8-A/12, Tatarpur. Even after receiving the RTI reply we did not file any case in the court seeking the declaration that Sh. Jagdish Chand Gupta was not the owner of suit property no.8-A/12, Tatarpur. We have filed an application before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India seeking the prayer to be impleaded as a party in the case pending before Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. The application was moved in the case titled as Sh. Jagdish Chander Vs Sh. Nand Ram. Again said Sh. Nand Ram Vs Sh. Jagdish Chander. I have not filed any application in subordinate courts in respect of the case pending in the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. I have not filed any case against Sh. Jagdish Chand Gupta whereby the rent receipts issued by sh. Jagdish Chand Gupta to us were sought to be declared null and void and without any power and capacity and without any ownership upon the suit property.....
..... The rate of rent was Rs.125/- p.m. in the rent receipts issued by the father of the petitioner to me and my brother the respondent no.1. I have not mentioned the fact in my W.S. that my brother Sh. Avinash Chander is also in possession of 400 sq. yard land in property No.8-A, Titarpur. I do not know if I have filed my W.S. in previous case pending between me and the petitioner bearing No. E- 203/2011 old No.E-3510/2010 titled as Subhash Chander Gupta Vs Ravi Kumar. My brother Sh. Avinash Chander knows about the present case pending in the court. I, my brother respondent no.1, has not filed any application for impleading my another brother Sh. Avinash Chander as a party. My brother Sh. Avinash Chander has also not filed any application in the court for impleading himself as a party in the petition. I have no document in respect of 400 sq. yard possession in Property No.8-A, Titar Pur. I have not filed any application in the Office of DDA/MCD or in any Govt. Office in respect of allotment of 400 sq. yard land situated in property No. 8-A, Titar Pur being in possession since 22.07.1980. We have not filed the rent receipts issued by the father of the petitioner to us in the office of DDA. In the year 1980 I was doing the work of scooter painting in premises in question. For the last 4/5 years I have changed my profession and at this time I am selling the tea in the premises in question. Though I had applied for registration of my profession of scooter painting but I do not have any document in this regard. One Sh. Manoj Kumar Sharma, Adv. is my nephew. It is wrong to suggest that I had sublet and part with possession of premises in question to Sh. Manoj Kumar Sharma, Adv. for his office. Vol. It is correct that Sh. Manoj Kumar Sharma, Adv. had affixed his sign board in the premises in question, however, there was no sub-letting. I do not know when Sh. Manoj Kumar Sharma, Adv. left the premises in question. The witness has been shown two photographs Ex.RW2/P1 and Ex.RW2/P2 in which the sign board of Sh. Manoj Kumar Sharma, Adv. Visibly seen and witness admitted the photographs to be related with the premises in question. The tyres seen in the photographs belongs to the petitioner. It is wrong to suggest that I and my brother sh. Ravi Kumar is the tenant of the petitioner in premises No.12 forming part of property No. 8-
A, Titar Pur, main Najafgarh Road, Tagore Garden, New Delhi. It is wrong to suggest that shop of the premises in question was constructed by the deceased father of the petitioner. It is wrong to suggest that we without written consent and permission of the father of the petitioner and the petitioner as well had sub-let the premises in question to several rickshaw owners and Sh. Manoj Kumar Sharma, Adv. It is wrong to suggest that we have neither paid nor tendered the rent to the petitioner and previously to the father of the petitioner when he was alive. It is wrong to suggest that despite the service of legal notice dated 13.01.2010 in previous eviction no. E-35/10 we did not pay the arrears of rent to the petitioner. It is further wrong to suggest that despite the service of legal notice dated 12.03.2013 we have neither paid nor tendered the arrears of rent to the petitioner. SDM Ram Pura did not pass any order to close the business/shop/premises in question. To my knowledge the appeal which was heard and adjudicated by Sh. Rakesh Siddharth, the then Ld. ADJ, Tis Hazari Courts, Delhi was against the order of SDM to continue and reopen the scrap business. The appeal pending in the Court of Sh. Rakesh Siddharth, the then Ld. ADJ, Delhi has been dismissed by that Hon'ble Court. It is wrong to suggest that I have deliberately not filed the rent receipt in this Court issued by the father of the petitioner in respect of the premises in question regarding my tenancy. It is wrong to suggest that we deliberately have not paid the arrears of rent to the petitioner and previously to his father despite the demand notices served upon us. I do not know if I have filed any law suit for declaration of ownership of the premises in question. It is wrong to suggest that I am deposing falsely."
11. Perusal of testimony of respondent no. 2 Sh. Subhash Chander shows that during the cross examination, respondent no. 2 has admitted that the rate of rent was Rs. 125/- p.m. and the rent receipts were issued by the father of the petitioner Sh. Jagdish Chand Gupta to him and his brother Sh. Ravi Kumar/ respondent no. 1.

Moreover, perusal of document i.e. RW-1/2 (OSR) letter issued by the Estate Officer, DDA to Sh. Subhash S/o Mangal Dass dated 08.01.1981 clearly shows that "C/O Jagdish Chand" has been mentioned in such address i.e R/o 8A, Tatarpur, Najafgarh Road, New Delhi. The same position is there in respect of RW-1/3 (OSR) and RW-1/4 (OSR) as these documents also show the name of Jagdish Chand as C/o. Even during the cross-examination, respondent no. 1 and Respondent no. 2 could not explain the reasons of mentioning of name of Sh. Jagdish Chand on these documents.

Perusal of record shows that during the cross- examination, the stand of the respondent was that they are in possession of 400 square yards but respondents themselves has admitted during the cross-examination that there is no such plea taken by them in their written statement.

Moreover, cross-examination of the RW-1 Sh. Ravi Kumar also shows that he has not denied that in the DDA papers C/o Sh. Jagdish Chand Gupta has been mentioned as they were the tenant of Sh. Jagidsh Chand Gupta. Perusal of record also shows that rent receipt issued by Sh. Jagdish Chand Gupta has not been challeged by the respondents and this fact has been admitted by the respondents during the cross examination.

12. As such, perusal of record manifestly shows that there existed the relationship of landlord-tenant between Sh. Jagdish Chand Gupta and respondent and also after the death of Sh. Jagdish Chand Gupta, between the petitioner and respondents as it is undisputed fact that petitioner is the son of Sh. Jagdish Chand Gupta. Moreover, the petitioner has placed on record judgment passed by the then Ld. SCJ Sh. Lokesh Kr. Sharma and Tax Survey report Ex. PW-3/A (OSR) which also shows the respondent no. 2 Sh. Subhash Chander as tenant and Sh. Jagidsh Chand Gupta as Tax Payer.

It is well settled proposition of the law that the Rent Controller is not supposed to decide the title while dealing with the petitions under D.R.C. Act. This is the jurisdiction of the Civil Court concerned. Moreover, U/Sec. 14(1)(a) of D.R.C. Act, the petitioner is not required to prove his ownership. He merely has to prove his landlordship. Moreover, even under the petition U/Sec. 14(1)(e) of the D.R.C. Act, the petitioner/ landlord has to prove that he is something more than the tenant/respondent. He does not have to prove his ownership in absolute terms.

13. In the present case, the petitioner has been able to prove that he is landlord in respect of tenanted premises and he is something more than the tenant/respondent. As far as title of the tenanted premises is concerned, the Rent Controller cannot decide the title under D.R.C. Act. The parties may approach before the Appropriate Forum having jurisdiction.

14. In my considered view, in view of discussion as earlier, there exists relationship of landlord-tenant between the parties.

(ii). Service of Legal Demand Notice:-

15. Perusal of record shows that the petitioner has claimed to have given legal demand notice dated 12.03.2013 Ex. PW-1/2 through postal receipts Ex. PW-1/3.

On the other hand, the respondents have claimed to have not received such legal demand notice and further claimed that the petitioner has no right to claim such arrears of rent from the respondents.

It is well settled law that mere denial is not sufficient. It is pertinent to reproduce the section 27 of General clauses Act which is as under :-

Section-27--Meaning of service by post--where any central Act or Regulation made after the commencement of this Act authorizes or requires any document to be served by post, whether the expression "serve" or either of the expressions "give" or "send" or any other expression is used then, unless a different intention appears, the service shall be deemed to be effected by properly addressing, pre- paying and posting by registered post, a letter containing the document, and unless the contrary is proved, to have been effected at the time at which the letter would be delivered in the ordinary course of post."
In the case titled as K. Bhaskaran vs. Sankaran Vaidhyan Balan 1999 A.I.R SC 3762, the Hon'ble Supreme court observed :-

"The principle incorporated in section 27 can profitably be imported in a case where the sender has dispatched the notice by post with the correct address written on it. Then it can be deemed to have been served on the sendee unless he proves that it was not really served and that he was not responsible for such non-service."
Section 114 of Indian Evidence Act, 1972 lays down as under:-

114: Court may presume existence of certain facts. That the court may presume existence of any fact which it thinks likely to have happened, regard being head to the common course of natural events, human conduct and public and private business, in their relation to the facts of the particular case.
Illustrations:
The court may presume-
(a)...
(b)...
(c)...
(d)...
(e)...
(f) That the common course of business has been followed in particular cases; -
(g)....
(h).....
(I).....
but the court shall also have regard to such facts as the following, in considering whether such maxim do or do not apply to the particular case before it:-"
As to illustration (a).....
As to illustration (b).....
As to illustration (c).....
As to illustration (d).....
As to illustration (e).....
As to illustration (f): The question is whether a letter was received. It is shown to have been posted, but the usual course of the post was interrupted by disturbances;
As to illustration (g).....
As to illustration (h).....
As to illustration (i)........"
16. It is well settled law that this presumption is a rebuttable presumption. If there is any such circumstance weakening such presumption, it cannot be ignored by the court. Moreover, presumptions U/Sec. 27 of General Clause Act and Sec. 114 of the Indian Evidence Act is always there to support the fact of service of such legal demand notice. Moreover, nothing concrete has been done by the respondents to rebut such presumption. Hence, service of legal demand notice as stipulated U/Sec. 14(1)(a) of D.R.C. Act is proved.

(iii). Non payment of rent:-

17. Perusal of record shows that in the present case, the petitioner has claimed the arrears of legally recoverable rent @ Rs. 125/- p.m. i.e. three years prior to filing of the petition.

On the other hand, the repondents have claimed that since the petitioner is not the landlord and the owner of the tenanted premises, they are not liable to pay or tender the rent to the petitioner.

This is not the case of respondents that they have paid or tendered the rent to the petitioner or deposited the rent with the court.

18. As discussed earlier exhaustively, the landlordship of the petitioner is already proved in the instant case. As such, this ingredient of non payment of arrears of legally recoverable rent within two months from the date of service of notice as provided U/Sec. 14(1)(a) of D.R.C. Act is also satisfied.

CONCLUSION :-

19. In view of the aforesaid discussion and settled proposition of law, this court has come to the conclusion that the petitioner has satisfied all the ingredients of Section 14(1)(a) of D.R.C. Act in respect of the tenanted premises i.e. private tin shed No. 12 measuring 25 sq. yards forming part of property No. 8-A, Tatarpur, Main Najafgarh Road, Tagore Garden, New Delhi as shown red in the site plan attached with the petition Ex. PW-1/1.

20. It is pertinent to mention that no order U/Sec. 15(1) D.R.C. Act was passed by the Ld. Predecessor or by this court. As such, in view of the material on record and discussion as earlier, an order U/Sec. 15(1) D.R.C. Act is passed directing the respondents to pay or tender or deposit the rent @ Rs. 125/- per month w.e.f. 12.07.2010 (Legally recoverable rent as the petition was filed on 12.07.2010) till date along with simple interest @ 15% p.a. within one month from the date of this order and they are further directed to pay or tender or deposit the future rent in favour of the petitioner at the same rate i.e. Rs. 125/- p.m. on or before the 15th day of each succeeding English calendar month.

21. Nazir is directed to file his report on 04.04.2020. regarding compliance of order U/Sec. 15(1) D.R.C. Act passed by this court today.

22. Miscellaneous file be prepared for ascertaining the benefits U/Sec. 14(2) of the D.R.C. Act.

23. It has been brought into the court that a costs of Rs. 8,000/- was imposed upon the respondents vide order dated 25.02.2020 with direction to deposit it with the DLSA by 4:00 p.m. on the same day but the same was not deposited within time and matter was reserved for judgment for 27.02.2020. But, it was brought into the notice of the court that it was deposited later on after the stipulated period time.

In my considered view, in the interest of justice, it should be refunded to the respondents in case it is deposited in compliance with the order dated 25.02.2020. Hence, costs of Rs. 8,000/- be refunded by the DLSA (West District), THC, Delhi in case it is deposited by the respondents on 26/27.02.2020.

24. It is pertinent to re-mention that although the present petition was filed U/S 14(1)(a)&(b) of DRC Act but on 15.02.2020, the relief U/S 14(1)(b) of DRC Act was withdrawn by the Ld. Counsel for the petitioner. As such, this court is not required to give the finding on U/S 14(1)(b) of DRC Act.

25. This file be consigned to Record Room after due compliance.

Announced in the open Court on 2nd March, 2020.