1. The present revision petition has been preferred by the petitioners against the order dated 23.03.2019 (herein after referred to as the impugned order) passed by Ld. M.M. (Mahila Court)­01, South­West District, Dwarka Criminal Revision No. 59/2020 D.O.D.: 28.02.2020 Courts, Delhi, whereby, ld. Trial Court has ordered for framing of charge in respect of offences punishable u/s 498A/406/34 IPC against them.

2. Brief facts, as per the complaint dated 28.03.2017 lodged by complainant/respondent no.2 with DCP, CAW Cell, Nanakpura, as are relevant and necessary for deciding the present revision petition are that respondent no.2, namely, Ms.Rekha Verma (hereinafter referred to as the complainant), got married with petitioner no.1 herein, namely, Raj Kumar, (hereinafter referred to as accused no.1) on 28.11.2013 according to Hindu rites, customs and ceremonies. She alleged that on the demand of her husband and his family, her parents gave gold ornaments/stridhan/gifts to them prior to the marriage, at the time of marriage and also after the marriage. She further alleged that after her marriage, her mother­in­law i.e. petitioner no.2 herein (hereinafter referred to as accused no.2), asked her to handover the cash received by her as gift in the marriage and accused no.1 also asked her to handover all the jewellery articles to accused no.2 for keeping in safe custody. The accused no.1 also used to cast false aspersions on her character and used to give beatings to her on petty issues like, talking to neighbours, spending time in bathroom etc.. She also alleged that on 08.10.2014, accused no.1 pressurised her to ask her parents and brothers for gifting him a smart phone on his birthday, which demand was fulfilled by her parents for the sake of her happy married life. After the birth of a girl child on 06.11.2014, the accused persons started treating her very badly as they were expecting a son and not a daughter. On 30.11.2014, the complainant was sent to her parents' home and she was brought back to her matrimonial home only on her great persuasions on 04.03.2015 and during her stay at her parental house during the aforesaid period, all the expenses relating to her and her daughter, were Criminal Revision No. 59/2020 D.O.D.: 28.02.2020 borne by her parents. On 01.02.2016, when she requested accused no.1 to give some money for personal expenses, he stated "Tum job karo aur apne kharche khud poorey karo" and when she asked for his ATM card, accused no.1 threw her on the floor. On 12.05.2016, accused no.1 abused her and gave beatings to her on the issue of expenses and accused no.2 encouraged accused no.1 for his said acts. On 23.06.2016, she alongwith her husband i.e. accused no.1 got shifted to a rented accommodation and at that time, all her jewellery articles were kept by her mother­in­law i.e. accused no.2 and by her brother­in­law by saying that it would not be safe to keep jewellery articles in a rented accommodation. It was further alleged that she was ill­treated and was harassed by her husband i.e. accused no.1 to bring money from her parents to enable him to pay back the loans as well as to buy a new car for his younger brother. On 14.01.2017 also, she was beaten up by her husband i.e. accused no.1 and her mother­in­law i.e. accused no.2 encouraged him to continue with the ill treatment with her.

3. On the basis of above said complaint, FIR No.116/2017 came to be registered for offences punishable under Section 498A/406/34 IPC at PS CWC Nanak Pura, New Delhi. After completion of investigation, the petitioners stood charge­sheeted for the said offences. After hearing arguments on the point of charge, impugned order came to be passed by the Court of ld. MM.

4. The impugned order has been assailed by the petitioners, inter alia, on the grounds that same is not sustainable and tenable on the basis of facts of the case and law on the point in issue and same is based upon conjectures and surmises; ld. MM failed to appreciate the fact that there was no material or Criminal Revision No. 59/2020 D.O.D.: 28.02.2020 any other substance for framing of charge against the petitioners; ld. MM did not exercise its judicial discretion in proper manner; and that, the impugned order has been passed in highly mechanical manner on the basis of false documentary evidence placed on record by the complainant.

5. Ld. counsel for petitioners argued on the lines of grounds of challenge to the impugned order, as noted hereinabove. He argued that soon after the marriage of accused no.l with complainant, they started residing together at H.No.7317, 3rd Floor, Gali No.2, Prem Nagar, Delhi, whereas accused no.2 alongwith her other two sons were residing at 1st & 2nd Floors of H.No.7317, Gali No.2, Prem Nagar, Delhi, as it was the prior condition of the family members of complainant that after the marriage, the complainant alongwith her husband would live separately from other family members. However, the complainant wrongly stated in her complaint that accused no.2 used to reside with them, in order to drag her into this false case. He further argued that accused no.2 i.e. mother­in­law is a senior citizen, who is suffering from various ailments including knee problem and it was not feasible for her to go upstairs to the house of complainant to harass her, which fact has been overlooked by ld. MM while passing the impugned order. He, therefore, urged that the impugned order may be set aside and both the petitioners, more particularly the petitioner no.2, may be discharged in this case.

6. On the other hand, ld. Addl.PP for the State/respondent no.1 repelled the aforesaid submissions made on behalf of petitioners and supported the impugned order by submitting that the impugned order is a well reasoned one and is based upon proper appreciation of facts and the material filed alongwith charge­sheet. He therefore, urged that the revision petition may be Criminal Revision No. 59/2020 D.O.D.: 28.02.2020 dismissed.

7. Learned counsel for respondent no.2/complainant further argued that there are specific allegations of demand of dowry, harassment and breach of trust against both the petitioners/accused persons. He further argued that minor daughter of accused no.1 and complainant is in the custody of complainant and the said accused is not even paying the interim maintenance awarded in favour of minor child by the Court of law. He, therefore, urged that the present revision petition may be dismissed.

8. I have already heard Sh. Balwan Singh, Advocate on behalf of revisionists/petitioners, Sh. Girish Kumar Manhas, ld. Addl. PP on behalf of respondent no.1/State and Sh. N.K. Bhambri, Advocate for respondent no.2. I have also gone through the entire records including the material available in the Trial Court Record.

9. Before dealing with the rival submissions made on behalf of both the sides, it would be appropriate to discuss the legal position on the issues involved herein.

10. The term 'dowry' has not been defined in Section 498A of IPC, but since this expression has been defined in Section 2 of Dowry Prohibition Act, it is required to be given the same meaning for the purpose of Section 498A IPC. The term 'dowry' has been defined as under:­ "Section 2 of Dowry Prohibition Act defines dowry as under:­

2. Definition of 'dowry':­ In this Act, "dowry" means any property or valuable security given or agreed to be given either directly or indirectly­ Criminal Revision No. 59/2020 D.O.D.: 28.02.2020

(a) by one party to a marriage to the other party to the marriage or

(b) by the parent of either party to a marriage or by any other person, to either party to the marriage or to any other person, at or before (or any time after the marriage) in connection with the marriage of the said parties, but does not include) dower or mehar in the case or persons to whom the Muslim Personal Law (Shariat) applies."

11. A careful analysis of the above­referred definition would show that dowry would include property or valuable security which is actually given or which is agreed to be given, in relation to the marriage of person in question. The property or valuable security may be given or may be agreed to be given before marriage or at the time of marriage or at any time after the marriage, so long as it is connected with the marriage. But, there has to be a link between the property given or agreed to be given and the marriage. If at any time before or at the time of or even during marriage, the parents of a woman or any other person related or connected to her agreed to give some cash, valuable security or property to her husband or in­laws after marriage, that would also be covered within the definition of dowry as the agreement or promise in such a case would be attributable to the marriage or proposed marriage and if there is demand for any cash property, valuable security etc. which is promised, but not given, it would constitute demand for dowry.

12. If the husband or any other person related or connected to him, demands something from the girl or her parents or any other person related to or connected with her, saying that the article being demanded by them was expected to be given or ought to have been given in marriage, that also, to my mind, would constitute demand of dowry because even though such an article Criminal Revision No. 59/2020 D.O.D.: 28.02.2020 may not have been agreed or promised to be given by the girl or her family members, it might have been in the contemplation of the boy and/or his family members, on account of the expectation that such an article would be given at the time of marriage. Therefore, such demand would be considered to be a demand in connection with the marriage though made after the marriage has been solemnized.

13. In the matter titled as 'Union of India Vs. Prafulla Kumar Samal' reported at AIR 1977 SC 2018, Hon'ble Apex Court has held that at the stage of framing charge, if there is a strong evidence which leads the Court to think that there is ground for presuming that the accused has committed an offence, then it is not open to the Court to see that there is no sufficient ground for proceedings against the accused. The accused cannot be discharged if from the First Information Report or complaint and the statements of the witnesses recorded under Section 161 of the Code and from all other material, a prima facie case is made out against the accused. At the initial stage, the truth, veracity and effect of the evidence which the prosecution proposes to adduce are not to be meticulously judged and the standard of test, proof and judgment which is to be applied finally before finding the accused guilty or otherwise is not exactly to be applied at the stage of framing of a charge. What the Court has to consider at this stage is only the sufficiency of the ground for proceedings against the accused and not whether materials on record are sufficient or adequate for conviction.

14. It may be noted that in the celebrated case of 'R.S Nayak Vs. A.R Antulay', reported at AIR 1984 SC 684, the Hon'ble Supreme Court while examining Sections 227, 239 and 245 of the Code relating to discharge in a Criminal Revision No. 59/2020 D.O.D.: 28.02.2020 trial (1) before a Court of Session, (2) of warrant cases, and (3) of summons cases, has observed that in spite of difference in the language of the three sections, the legal position is that if the trial Court is satisfied that prima facie case is made out, the charge has to be framed.

15. Now adverting back to the facts of the present case. There are specific allegations appearing against both these petitioners in respect of offences U/s 498A/406/34 IPC and those allegations have been duly pointed out on behalf of complainant/respondent no.2, as already noted above in preceding para. There are allegations of mental and physical torture being meted out to the complainant by both these petitioners/accused persons as per allegations appearing in the FIR. If the First Information Report, the statements recorded under Section 161 of the Code, and the other material collected during investigation are judged at the touch stone of the above principles, the necessary conclusion is that there is a ground to presume that both these petitioners have prima facie committed the offences punishable under Section 498­A/406/34 IPC. At this stage, the prosecution case cannot be thrown out merely by observing that the averments or the allegations in the complaint/First Information Report are vague and indefinite or are false.

16. In the matter titled as 'Girjashankar Vs. State of M.P' reported at 1988 Cri LR (MP)1, High Court of M.P. has held that 'Cruelty' does not necessarily mean physical chastisement. Section 498­A, IPC and Section 113 of the Evidence Act are of wide amplitude. Explanation appended to Section 498­A IPC explains as to what cruelty means. It should not be narrowly construed so as to suggest or embrace acts of physical torture alone and it should also be borne in mind in this context that such acts of cruelty are Criminal Revision No. 59/2020 D.O.D.: 28.02.2020 invariably committed within the four wall of a house and naturally, eye­ witnesses to such incidents are not easily available.

17. No doubt, there is growing tendency on the part of complainant to make all kinds of wild and material allegations against the entire family of husband, but at the same time, it cannot be overlooked that when there are direct and specific allegations against in­laws, it is not permissible to discharge them at that stage and prosecution deserves to be granted an opportunity to prove those allegations by producing its witnesses during trial.

18. In the light of aforesaid discussion, I do not find any illegality or infirmity in the impugned order passed by Ld. MM. Resultantly, the present revision petition is hereby dismissed being devoid of merits.

19. Trial Court record be sent back alongwith copy of this order to the Trial/Successor Court immediately for information.

20. File of revision petition be consigned to Record Room.
