CS 277/17 CHAHATI DEVI V RAM DAS GUPTA & ANOTHER 1/15

1. The plaintiff is a senior citizen and aged about 70 years. The plaintiff is the owner of the built up property bearing Municipal No.B-29, Shanti Nagar, Shiv Vihar measuring 100 sq. yards approximately (herein after referred to as "suit property") by virtue of Agreement to Sale, Receipt, General Power of Attorney dated 28.02.1989. The plaintiff by virtue of two sale deeds dated 02.09.1996 sold 50 sq. yards each (total 100 sq. yards) to Bhagwati Devi and Prahlad Singh out of total property measuring 200 sq. yards. The defendants shifted in portion of built property of the plaintiff as a licensee comprising two shops and one room as shown in red color in the site plan (herein after referred to as "suit premises") and rest of the portion of the suit property is used as common area by the parties. The plaintiff is having three sons namely, Ram Das Gupta (defendant no.1), Pawan Kumar Gupta and Praveen Kumar Gupta who are married. The defendant no.1 got married with the defendant no.2 in the year 1994. The behavior of the defendants was not proper towards the plaintiff and her husband. The plaintiff and her husband disowned the defendants by publishing a notice in daily newspaper 'Amar Ujala' published on 15.07.2010. The defendants out of conspiracy are in matrimonial litigation since 2010 wherein the plaintiff and her husband are impleaded as parties. The plaintiff got issued a legal notice dated 27.03.2017 through Advocate Mohit Sharma whereby terminated the license of the defendants. The possession of the defendants in respect of the suit premises has become unauthorized with effect from 01.04.2017. The plaintiff is also entitled to charge Rs.8,000/- per month from the date of expiry of license of the defendants for use and occupation of the suit premises. The plaintiff being aggrieved filed the present suit for recovery of possession, damages and permanent injunction and prayed as under:-

i. Pass a decree of recovery of possession in his favour of the plaintiff and against the defendants in respect of the suit property bearing its Municipal no.B-29, Shanti Nagar, Shiv Vihar, Delhi admeasuring approximately 23 sq. meters i.e. two shops, one room under their independent possession, more particularly shown in red colour in the site plan enclosed with the plaint ii. Pass an order thereby directing to hold an enquiry u/o. XX Rule 12 of CPC for the amount payable by the defendants to the plaintiff for use and occupation charges to the property in question iii. Pass an order after holding an enquiry against the defendants thereby directing them to pay the use and occupation charges @ 8,000/- p.m and/or to so determined by this Hon'ble Court to the plaintiff w.e.f.
01.04.2017 till such time the actual peaceful physical CS 277/17 CHAHATI DEVI V RAM DAS GUPTA & ANOTHER 2/15 possession is handed over to the plaintiff; in the meantime, the defendants be directed to deposit/pay to the plaintiff the use and occupation charges in terms of the order XXXIX Rule 10 of the CPC at such a rate as this Hon'ble Court deem fit and proper at this stage; iv. Restrain the defendants, their attorney, agents, servants, representatives etc. permanently from creating any third party interest and transfer/part with the possession of the suit property i.e. Municipal no. B-29, Shanti Nagar, Shiv Vihar, Delhi admeasuring approx.23 sq. mtrs i.e. two shops, one room under their independent possession, more particularly shown in red colour in the site plan enclosed with the plaint;
v. award the costs of the suit in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendants;
Pass any other or further order as this Hon'ble Court may deem fit and proper in favour of the plaintiff and against the defendants in view of the facts and circumstances of the case.
2. The defendants filed their respective written statement to contest the claims of the plaintiff. The defendant no.1 in preliminary objections stated that the suit is not maintainable. The suit is an abuse of process of law. The plaintiff has not appeared with clean hands. The suit is liable to be dismissed for want of cause of action. The defendant no.1 in reply on merits admitted issuance of legal notice dated 27.03.2017. The defendant no.1 is not in unauthorized possession of the suit property and is not liable to pay the rent @ 8,000/- per month. The defendant no.1 also denied other allegations of the plaintiff.

The defendant no.2 in preliminary objections stated that the suit is liable to be dismissed under Order VII Rule 11 CPC as the suit is without any cause of action. The plaintiff has not appeared with clean hands and concealed the material facts. The plaintiff has purchased the suit property after disposing ancestral property. The defendant no.1 is the son of the plaintiff. The defendant no.2 is the wife of the defendant no.1. The defendant no.2 never took the suit premises as a licensee but the same was handed over to the defendants as per family settlement. The plaintiff has given other properties to the remaining two sons. The defendant no.2 has already filed a petition under Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 against the plaintiff, defendant no.1 and other family members. The defendant no.2 on reply on merits stated that she has not received any notice. The defendant no.2 is not a licensee under the plaintiff but residing along with children in the suit property as per family settlement. The plaintiff tried to take forcible CS 277/17 CHAHATI DEVI V RAM DAS GUPTA & ANOTHER 3/15 possession of the suit property. The defendant no.2 also denied the other allegations of the plaintiff.

3. The plaintiff filed the replication to the written statement of the defendant no.2 wherein reasserted and reaffirmed the previous stand.

4. Vide order dated 05.04.2018, following issues were framed:-

(1) Whether the suit of the plaintiff has not been valued properly for the purposes of court fees? OPP (2)Whether the suit of the plaintiff is liable to be dismissed under Section 41 of the Specific Relief Act? OPD (3)Whether the plaintiff is entitled for a decree of possession in respect of property bearing no.B-29, Shanti Nagar, Shiv Vihar, Delhi, as prayed in the plaint? OPP (4)Whether the plaintiff is entitled to recover the use and occupation charges from the defendants, as claimed in the plaint. If so, at what rate and for which period? OPP (5)Whether the plaintiff is entitled for a decree of permanent injunction, as prayed in the plaint? OPP (6) Relief.
5. The plaintiff examined her as PW1 and tendered affidavit which is Ex.PW1/A. The plaintiff relied upon the documents which are Ex.PW1/1 to Ex.PW1/9. The plaintiff's evidence was ordered to be closed vide order dated 08.04.2019 The defendant no.1 preferred not to lead evidence and accordingly, the evidence of the defendant no.1 was ordered to be closed vide order dated 08.04.2019. The defendant no.2 examined her as DW1 and tendered the affidavit which is Ex.DW1/A. The evidence of the defendant no.2 was ordered to be closed vide order dated 21.08.2019.

6. Sh. Arun Kaushik, Advocate for the plaintiff, Sh. V.K. Sharma, Advocate for the defendant no.1 and Sh. Naresh Kumar Sharma, Advocate for the defendant no.2 heard. Record perused.

ISSUE WISE FINDINGS ARE AS UNDER ISSUE NO 1 Whether the suit of the plaintiff has not been valued properly for the purposes of court fees? OPP

7. The plaintiff stated that the value of the suit for the purpose of recovery of possession is Rs.10,00,000/-as per the circle rate. The plaintiff has claimed damages for the use and occupation of the suit property @ 8,000/- for the period with effect from April, 2017 to CS 277/17 CHAHATI DEVI V RAM DAS GUPTA & ANOTHER 4/15 October, 2017, total amounting to Rs.56,000/-. The plaintiff also valued the suit for the purpose of court fee and jurisdiction at Rs.130/-. The plaintiff has paid court fee of Rs.12,670/- for the reliefs of possession, damages and permanent injunction. The defendant no.1 alleged that the suit is liable to be dismissed for want of payment of court fee on the suit. The defendant no.2 alleged that the suit is not maintainable for want of payment of proper court fee.

8. Section 7(v) of the Court-fees Act, 1870 provides for Court-fee in suits for the possession of land, houses and gardens and lays down that the value of such a suit would be according to value of the subject-matter. It proceeds further and provides for what should be deemed to be the value of the subject-matter. Clause (e) provides that the value of the subject-matter, when it is a house or garden, will be the market value of the house or garden. The Patna High Court in Jagdish Chandra Ghose & others V Basant Kumar Bose & another, AIR 1963 Pat 308 considered issue what would be the basis of valuation of a suit for ejectment of a licensee when he continues to live in the licensed premises in spite of termination of his license. It was observed that no provision has been made specifically with regard to recovery of property from a person whose license in respect of that property has ended. It was observed as under:-

The difference between a tenant and a licensee is substantial. 'Lease' has been defined in Section 105 or the Transfer of Property Act, and 'license' has been defined in Section 52 of the Indian Easements Act (V of 1882). Whereas a tenant or lessee has a definite interest in the property which is put in his possession, a licensee has no such interest. There must be consideration for creation of a lease; but there may or may not be any consideration for grant of a license. While a tenant may hold over, in certain circumstances, after determination of his tenancy, a licensee cannot continue to be in possession or any property for more than a reasonable time after his license is terminated. There is, therefore, no escape from the conclusion that, if a licensee continues to be in possession of certain premises after "expiry of a reasonable time from the date" his license is revoked, he does so only as a trespasser. If, therefore, a suit is instituted for his eviction, it is clearly a suit for recovery of possession from a trespasser. The entire value of the property in question must be held to be the value of the subject-matter of the suit.
9. The plaintiff has purchased the suit property for a sale consideration of Rs.52,000/- in the year 1989. The plaintiff claimed that the defendants were in permissive possession of CS 277/17 CHAHATI DEVI V RAM DAS GUPTA & ANOTHER 5/15 the suit premises as licensee and license of the defendants have already been terminated. The defendants have not led any evidence to prove that the suit is not properly valued for the purpose of court fee and jurisdiction. The defendants did not mention current market value of the suit premises. In the absence of contrary evidence, it is proved that the suit is properly valued for the purpose of court fee and jurisdiction for the relief, as prayed for in the present suit. Issue no.1 is decided in favor of the plaintiff and against the defendants.

ISSUE NO 2 Whether the suit of the plaintiff is liable to be dismissed under Section 41 of the Specific Relief Act? OPD

10. The defendant no2 in preliminary objections alleged that the suit is liable to be dis- missed under section 41 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 as the plaintiff has not appeared with clean hands and concealed material facts. Section 41 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 deals with conditions when injunction can be refused. The Supreme Court of India in Arunima Baruah V Union of India & others, Appeal (civil) 2205 of 2007 decided on 27th April, 2007 considered how far and to what extent suppression of fact by way of non- disclosure would affect a person's right of access to justice. The appellant filed a suit in the District Court but no order of ad-interim injunction was passed. The appellant filed a writ petition before the High Court without disclosing pendency of the said suit. The appellant before hearing of writ petition filed an application for withdrawal of the suit. The suit was allowed to be withdrawn after hearing of writ petition. The writ petition was dismissed by High Court due to concealment of fact by the petitioner and forum hunting. The appeal was also dismissed. It was observed as under:-

(t)o enable the court to refuse to exercise its discretionary jurisdic- tion suppression must be of material fact. What would be a material fact, suppression whereof would disentitle the appellant to obtain a discretionary relief, would depend upon the facts and circumstances of each case. Material fact would mean material for the purpose of determination of the lis, the logical corollary whereof would be that whether the same was material for grant or denial of the relief. If the fact suppressed is not material for determination of the lis between the parties, the court may not refuse to exercise its discretionary ju- risdiction. It is also trite that a person invoking the discretionary ju-
risdiction of the court cannot be allowed to approach it with a pair of CS 277/17 CHAHATI DEVI V RAM DAS GUPTA & ANOTHER 6/15 dirty hands. But even if the said dirt is removed and the hands be- come clean, whether the relief would still be denied is the question.

11. In present suit the plaintiff pleaded that the plaintiff is the owner of the suit property by virtue of Agreement to Sale, Receipt, General Power of Attorney dated 28.02.1989 and allowed the defendants to shift in suit premise as licensee. The plaintiff got issued a legal notice dated 27.03.2017 whereby terminated the license of the defendants. The plaintiff as such disclosed all relevant material facts necessary for proper adjudication of the present suit. The defendant no.2 did not disclose material facts which are concealed by the plaintiff. The plaintiff did not conceal material facts in present suit. The issue no.2 is decided in favor of the plaintiff and against the defendant no.2.

ISSUE NO 3 Whether the plaintiff is entitled for a decree of possession in respect of property bearing no.B-29, Shanti Nagar, Shiv Vihar, Delhi, as prayed in the plaint? OPP

12. The plaintiff pleaded that she was the owner of the suit property having purchased from Siri Ram Garg vide Agreement to Sell, General Power of Attorney and Receipt dated 28.02.1989 Ex.PW1/2 to Ex.PW1/4. The plaintiff has sold 50 sq. yards each to Bhagwati Devi and Prahlad Singh vide two Sale Deeds dated 02.09.1996. The plaintiff raised the construction in the remaining 100 sq. yards and after construction the defendants have shifted in suit premises comprising two shops and one room as shown in red color in the site plan Ex.PW1/1. The plaintiff has terminated the license of the defendants vide notice dated 27.03.2013 Ex.PW1/7 sent by post through postal receipts Ex.PW1/8. The plaintiff also disowned the defendants vide notice Ex.PW1/9 published in daily newspaper 'Amar Ujala'. The plaintiff in affidavit Ex.PW1/A also deposed above mentioned facts. The plaintiff in cross-examination conducted on behalf of the defendant no.1 denied the suggestions that she is not the owner of the suit property or that the defendants are owner of the suit property. The plaintiff was not cross-examined on behalf of the defendant no.2.

13. The contesting the defendant no.2 alleged that she along with her children is in the possession of the suit property which was handed over to the defendant as per family settlement. The defendant no.2 was never inducted as a licensee in the suit property. The defendant no.2 in affidavit Ex.DW1/A deposed that the suit property was purchased by defendant no.1 in the name of the plaintiff after disposing of the ancestral properties CS 277/17 CHAHATI DEVI V RAM DAS GUPTA & ANOTHER 7/15 situated in U.P. The defendant no.1 has constructed the ground floor of the suit property comprising of three shops, two rooms, one kitchen cum room, one toilet and varanda (courtyard). The defendant no.1 is running a confectionery shop in one shop and the defendant no.2 is running a cosmetics business in another shop. The plaintiff has given the suit property to the defendants out of the family settlement and also given other properties to remaining two sons namely, Pawan Kumar Gupta and Praveen Kumar Gupta. The defendant no.2 in cross-examination deposed that she has filed a complaint u/s.12 of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 against the plaintiff and other family members. The family settlement took place on 24.03.2015 but further said that the said family settlement was effected about 20-22 years ago. The defendant no.2 could not tell the exact date of the family settlement but admitted that no document was executed regarding the family settlement. The defendant no.2 as DW1 denied the suggestions that the defendants are not the owner of the suit property or that the defendant no.2 is residing in the suit property as a licensee or that she does not have any right in the suit property or that no family settlement was ever arrived at between the parties or that the suit property was not given to the defendant no.1 as family settlement or that the defendant no.2 is residing in the suit property illegally. The defendant no.2 admitted the service of the legal notice dated 27.03.2017.

14. The counsel for the plaintiff argued that the defendants have not challenged documents Ex.PW1/2 to Ex.PW1/4 regarding the ownership of the plaintiff in respect of the suit property. The defendant no.2 has not led any evidence regarding the family settlement as alleged in the written statement and affidavit Ex.DW1/A. The counsel for the plaintiff relied on Santosh Kumari v Mahendri & Others, 2018(4) CLJ 569 Del & Sachin & Another v Jhabbu Lal & Another, 2016(2) RCR 536. The counsel for the defendant no.1 argued that General Power of Attorney does not confer any right of ownership. The plaintiff has not led any evidence regarding the damages. The counsel for the defendant no.2 argued that the plaintiff has filed the present suit with a malafide intention as the defendant no.2 filed petition under Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 against the plaintiff and other family members including the defendant no.1 prior to the filing of the present suit. The counsel for the defendant no.2 relied on Vinay Varma v Kanika Pasricha & Another, 2020(1) Civil Court Cases 035(Delhi).

15. A license is a personal right granted to a person to do something upon immovable CS 277/17 CHAHATI DEVI V RAM DAS GUPTA & ANOTHER 8/15 property of the grantor and does not amount to the creation of interest in the property itself. It is purely a permissive right and is personal to the grantee. It creates no duties and obligations upon the persons making the grant and is, therefore, revocable except in certain circumstances expressly provided for in the Indian Easements act, 1882 itself. A license may be oral in which case, terms, conditions and the nature of the license, can be gathered from the purpose for which the license is granted coupled with the conduct of the parties and the circumstances which may have led to the grant of the license. Every license is governed by the provisions under the Indian Easements Act, 1882. A license does not confer an interest. According to English Law, a license is purely a personal privilege or right enabling the licensee to do something on the land of the licensor which would otherwise be unlawful. Section 52 of Indian Easements Act, 1882 defines license as under:-

Where one person grants to another, or to a definite number of other persons, a right to do or continue to do, in or upon immovable property of the grantor, something which would, in the absence of such rights, be unlawful, and such right does not amount to an easement or an interest in the property, the right is called a license.
Under Section 52 if a person is given the right to use the immovable property in a particular way under certain terms while retaining control and possession of the same, the person so permitted is only a licensee. The Supreme Court in Associated Hotels of India Ltd. v. R.N. Kapoor, AIR 1959 SC 1262 summed the concept of license as under:-

Under the aforesaid section, if a document gives only a right to use the property in particular way or under certain terms while it remains in the possession and control of the owner thereof, it will be a license. The legal possession, thereof, continues to be with the owner of the property, but the licensee is permitted to make use of the premises for a particular purpose. But for the permission, his occupation would be unlawful. It does not create in his favour any estate or interest in the property.
In M.N. Clubwala V Fida Hussain Saheb, [1964] 6 SCR 642 it was observed that whether an agreement creates between the parties the relationship of landlord and tenant or merely that of licensor and licensee the decisive consideration is the intention of the parties. This intention has to be ascertained on a consideration of all the relevant provisions in the agreement. In Rajbir Kaur and another V S. Chokesiri and Co., AIR 1988 SC 1845 it was CS 277/17 CHAHATI DEVI V RAM DAS GUPTA & ANOTHER 9/15 observed that the question whether a transaction is a lease or license turns on the operative intention of the parties and there is no single, simple litmus test to distinguish one from the other. In Delta International Limited V Shyam Sundar Ganeriwalla & another, AIR 1999 SC 2607 it was observed that to find out whether the document creates lease or license real test is to find out 'the intention of the parties' keeping in mind that in cases where exclusive possession is given, the line between lease and license is very thin.

16. It is reflecting from the combined reading and analysis of the respective pleadings and evidence of the plaintiff and the defendants is that the plaintiff was the owner of the suit property by virtue of Agreement to Sale Ex.PW1/2, General Power of Attorney Ex.PW1/3 and Receipt Ex.PW1/4 having purchased from Siri Ram Garg, S/o. Gauri Mal Garg, R/O.B足123, Jyoti Colony, Shahdara, Delhi足110032. The plaintiff sold 50 sq. yards each(total 100 sq. yards) to Bhagwati Devi and Prahlad Singh vide two Sale Deeds dated 02.09.1996. The defendants have not disputed specifically ownership of the plaintiff in respect of the suit property constructed on remaining 100 sq. yards and now bearing Municipal no.B足29, Shanti Nagar, Shiv Vihar, Delhi. The defendants did not disclose or mention who else is the owner of the suit property. The counsel for the defendant no.1 argued that General Power of Attorney does not confer any right of ownership as title documents relied upon by the plaintiff are unregistered documents. The ownership document Ex.PW1/2 to Ex.PW1/4 relied on by the plaintiff were executed on 28.02.1989 i.e. prior to 24.09.2001 when by Act 48 of 2001, the provisions of section 53足A of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 was amended along with related provisions of the Stamp Act, 1899 and Registration Act, 1908 and only as per these provisions after 24.09.2001 there was a requirement for stamping and registration of the documents. It is only an agreement to sell and related documents which are executed after 24.09.2001 require stamping and registration. (Reliance placed on Santosh Kumari V Mahendri & others, 2018(4)CLJ569Del.). There is no force in arguments advanced by counsel for the defendant no.1 that title documents Ex.PW1/2 to Ex.PW1/4 do not confer any ownership right in respect of suit property being unregistered and unstamped.

17. The plaintiff was having three sons namely, Ram Das Gupta i.e defendant no.1, Pawan Kumar Gupta and Praveen Kumar Gupta. The defendant no.1 got married with the defendant no.2 in the year 1994. The defendant no.1 and the defendant no.2 are not CS 277/17 CHAHATI DEVI V RAM DAS GUPTA & ANOTHER 10/15 enjoying healthy marital relationship and are under matrimonial litigation. The defendant no.2 has already filed a petition u/s.12 of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 against the plaintiff and other family members including the defendant no.1 which is still pending. The main plea which is taken by the contesting defendant no.2 is that the suit property was purchased by the defendant no.1 in the name of the plaintiff after disposing of the ancestral properties situated in Uttar Pradesh (U.P). However, the defendant no.2 has not taken said plea in the written statement. It was a material fact which was required to be mentioned in the written statement. In Maria Margarida Sequeria Fernandes V Erasmo Jack de Sequeria, (2012)5SCC370, the Supreme Court laid stress on purity of pleadings in civil cases. It was observed that pleadings are extremely important in civil cases and in order to do justice, it is necessary to give all details in the pleadings. This view was again reaffirmed in A. Shanmugam V Ariya Kshatriya Rajakula Vamsathu Madalaya Nandhavana Paripalanai Sangam, (2012)6SCC430. Even otherwise also the defendant no.2 has not led any evidence to prove that the suit property was purchased by the defendant no.1 in the name of the plaintiff after disposing of the ancestral properties situated in Uttar Pradesh(U.P). The documents Ex.PW1/2 to Ex.PW1/4 reflect that the plaintiff is the owner of the suit property.

18. The contesting defendant no.2 alleged that that the suit property was given to the defendant no.1 out of the family settlement by the plaintiff. The defendant no.1 did not mention that the suit property came into his share by virtue of family settlement. The defendant no.2 also did not disclose the details of the properties stated to be given to the other sons namely, Pawan Kumar Gupta and Praveen Kumar Gupta of the plaintiff out of the family settlement. The defendant no.2 in cross-examination admitted that she did not remember the exact date of the family settlement and no written document was executed at the time of family settlement. Initially the burden to prove was on the plaintiff that she is the owner of the suit property which the plaintiff has discharged by leading appropriate evidence. The onus to prove was on the defendant no.2 that the suit property came into the share of the defendant no.1 as per family settlement. It was observed in Rangammal V Kuppuswami and others, Civil Appeal No 562 of 2003 observed that burden of proof lies on the person who first asserts the fact and not on the one who denies that fact to be true. The responsibility of the defendant to prove a fact to be true would start only when the authenticity of the fact is proved by the plaintiff. In Anil Rishi V Gurbaksh Singh, (2006) CS 277/17 CHAHATI DEVI V RAM DAS GUPTA & ANOTHER 11/15 5 SCC 558 it has been held that the burden of proving the facts rests on the party who substantially asserts the affirmative issues. This view was also accepted in M/S. Gian Chand & Brothers and Another V Rattan Lal @ Rattan Singh, (2013) SCR 601. The defendant no.2 could not discharge the said onus by leading appropriate evidence. There is no evidence which can reflect that the plaintiff was the owner of the several properties and the suit property came into the share of the defendant no.1 as per family settlement. The plaintiff has already terminated the license of the defendants in respect of the premises under their possession vide legal notice dated 27.03.2017 Ex.PW1/7 which was sent through postal receipt Ex.PW1/8. The defendant no.1 in written statement and the defendant no.2 in cross-examination admitted the service of notice Ex.PW1/7. The plaintiff as such terminated the license of the defendants. It was observed by Delhi High Court in Sachin & another V Jhabbu Lal & another, 2016(2)RCR(Rent)536 that where the house is self-acquired house of the parents, son whether married or unmarried, has no legal right to live in that house and he can live in that house only at the mercy of his parents up to the time the parents allow and merely because the parents have allowed him to live in the house so long as his relations with the parents were cordial, does not mean that the parents have to bear his burden throughout his life. The plaintiff is as such entitled for the recovery of possession of the suit premises as shown in red color in the site plan Ex.PW1/1. Issue no 3 is decided in favor of the plaintiff and against the defendants.