The present criminal revision petition is against the order dated 10.06.2011 passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Jalandhar whereby charges have been framed under Section 306 IPC against the petitioners.

Brief facts of the case are that the above said F.I.R was registered on the suicide note written by Rajinder Kumar @ Rajinder Kumar @ Raja alleging therein that Rajinder Kumar @ Raja was not having cordial relations with his wife Meenu, Hans Raj (father-in-law), Neelam Rani (sister-in-law) and Varinder Kumar @ Sonu (brother-in- law). It is alleged that Sonu was threatening Rajinder Kumar @ Raja and due to that he felt helpless. Before committing suicide, Rajinder Kumar @ Raja had applied to go to Saudi Arab but the passport authorities at Jalanhdar did not give him passport. He used to go to passport officer everyday as they used to call him but did not tell him anything. After being harassed by the persons of passport office, he committed suicide. He met the officer of passport officer but he too did not gave him any answer. The investigation was carried out by ASI Bikram Singh (P-2) and as per report under Section of the Code of Criminal Procedure (for short 'the Code'), it was submitted that ASI Bikram Singh reached the spot on receiving an information that Rajinder Kumar alias Rajinder Kumar @ Raja is hanging from the ceiling fan with the "chunni" in his room. Thereafter, ASI Bikram Singh along with Mulakh Raj 1951 HC Balbir Singh 1159 PHG Surinder Pal 2705 reached the spot and found a suicide note of Rajinder Kumar @ Raja near the bed. Thereafter, the suicide note of the deceased along with other papers of writings diary and signatures were taken in a sealed envelope and the same was submitted to FSL Chandigarh. Subsequently, Meenu (wife of the deceased) , Hans Raj (father-in-law), Neelam Rani (sister-in-law) and Sonu (brother-in-law) were arrested after making them join the investigation. A challan was presented on 14.02.2011. Statement of Jit Ram (father of deceased) was also recorded (P-3) who stated that Rajinder Kumar @ Raja was staying with his wife and children separately. He further stated that Meena Kumari alias Meenu (wife of Rajinder Kumar @ Raja) had gone to her parental house from quite some time. On 19.09.2010, Rajinder Kumar @ Raja was alone in the house and told his father that his in-laws family were harassing him lot in which his wife, brother-in-law and his wife, father- in-law were included. They were compelling him to die. Rajinder Kumar @ Raja had earlier quarreled with his wife and her in-laws used to call him with bad names threaten him to kill. Many times the compromise was effected, Meenu used to stay with her in-laws family and many a times used to stay in her parental house. On 20.09.2010, Rajinder Kumar @ Raja did not wake up and his Son Surinder Kumar told him that he called up many times on his phone but Rajinder Kumar @ Raja did not wake up. Thereafter, they opened the door from behind and found the dead body of Rajinder Kumar @ Raja was hanging with the fan besides his bed aside. Sarpanch of the village was then called who came to the spot and called the police. The police released the dead body of Rajinder Kumar @ Raja from the fan and recovered a notice hand written by Rajinder Kumar @ Raja. Rajinder Kumar @ Raja was not having cordial relations with his wife Meenu, Hans Raj (father-in-law), Neelam Rani (sister-in-law) and Sonu (brother-in-law) due to which he committed suicide.

Vide order dated 10.06.2011, the Additional Sessions Judge, Jalandhar has framed the charges under Section 306 IPC against wife Meenu, Hans Raj (father-in-law), Neelam Rani (sister-in-law) and Sonu (brother-in-law).

Learned counsel for the petitioners sought quashing of this order on the ground that as per the suicide note there are no direct allegations that the petitioners had instigated or abetted Rajinder Kumar @ Raja to commit suicide. The allegations against the in-laws family of Rajinder Kumar @ Raja are general in nature. It has further been argued by learned counsel that a specific role has been attributed to the Passport authority who had not issued him passport despite the fact that he had visited the passport authorities many times. Reference has been made to the harassment caused by the passport office. From the reading of the suicide note, one thing is clear that Rajinder Kumar @ Raja did not have cordial relations with his in-laws family but the contents of the suicide note did not make out a case of abetment as contemplated under Section 107 IPC to the extent that the in-laws had instigated Rajinder Kumar @ Raja to commit suicide. A close reading of the suicide note on the other hand makes reference to the fact that he had applied for the passport to go to Saudi Arab and the authority did not give him passport. He had visited the passport everyday and felt harassed by the officers of the passport office. The relationship between Rajinder Kumar @ Raja with his in-laws family was not cordial but it was not the immediate cause for Rajinder Kumar @ Raja to commit suicide. It is nowhere mentioned in the suicide note of Rajinder Kumar @ Raja that his in laws family had instigated him or threatened him before he committed suicide on 20.09.2010. As per the statement given by the father of Rajinder Kumar @ Raja Ram, it has been submitted that Meenu (wife of Rajinder Kumar @ Raja) had gone to her parental house for quite some time and on the date Rajinder Kumar @ Raja committed suicide, he was alone in the house since his wife along with children were not present. The allegation that her in-laws family had instigated Rajinder Kumar @ Raja before he committed suicide, so as to make out an offence under Section 306 IPC. As far as the Virender Kumar @ Sonu is concerned since he was not residing or he had not visited the deceased much before he committed suicide, the allegations that he had abetted him to commit suicide did not carry any weight.

Learned State counsel, on the other hand has argued that after framing of the charge , the petitioners are at liberty to take all the pleas before the trial Court. A suicide note clearly states that he was constantly harassed by her in-laws family . He had even applied for the passport to go to Saudi Arab. Due to his unhappy family life, he had committed suicide. Statement of father of the deceased as well as of Sarpanch of the village has also been recorded. Both in their statements have submitted that Rajinder Kumar @ Raja (deceased) has uncordial relations with his in-laws family. The compromise was also effected in the presence of Sarpanch but he was quite unhappy with his in-laws family as they used to harass him.

"Explanation 2 - Whoever, either prior to or at the time of the commission of an act, does anything in order to facilitate the commission of that act, and thereby facilitate the commission thereof, is said to aid the doing of that act."
In the facts of the present case, as per the suicide note, the deceased was having uncordial relations with his in-laws family. He felt harassed and in that background, he had applied for the passport to go to Saudi Arab. As per explanation 2 of Section 107, the Court has to examine before he committed suicide nothing was done by the accused nor facilitate the commission of that act or said something to him. Since the relations were not cordial with his in-laws family as per the suicide note, it had to be a case of committing an act jointly by her wife and her in-laws family members. As per the statement given by Jit Ram, the wife of deceased Rajinder Kumar @ Raja was staying in her parental house for quite sometime. On the date of committing suicide on 20.09.2010, Rajinder Kumar @ Raja was alone at home. This fact has been stated by Sarpanch of the village in his statement.
