MANMOHAN, J:

I.A. 4780/2014

1. Present application being I.A. 4780/2014 has been filed under Order 7 Rule 11 CPC on behalf of the defendants No.1, 2 and 5 for rejection of the plaint filed by the minor plaintiffs through their mother.

2. It is pertinent to mention that the present suit has been filed seeking partition, rendition of accounts and permanent injunction against their grandparents i.e. defendants No.1 and 5 as well as their father (defendant No.4) and aunt and uncle i.e. defendants No.2 and 3.

3. The learned Predecessor of this Court vide ex parte ad interim order dated 02nd December, 2013, directed the defendants to maintain status quo with regard to suit property bearing No.C-117, East of Kailash, New Delhi- 110065 as regards possession and title. On 27th September, 2018, this Court clarified that it had not granted any stay of proceedings in Appeal No.30/2013 i.e. Kuldeep Singh Gulati and Anr. Vs. Sandeep Gulati & Anr. pending under the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2017 before the Divisional Commissioner and the said forum was free to proceed with the case, in the event there was no stay order passed by any other Court.

ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF THE DEFENDANTS NO.1, 2 AND 5

4. At the outset, Mr. V.K. Bali, learned senior counsel for defendant No.1, 2 and 5-applicants, submitted that the present suit was not maintainable as an identical suit of the father of plaintiffs being CS(OS) 886/2013 with the same averments and seeking the same relief, after hearing arguments on the very first date of hearing, had been dismissed as withdrawn with liberty to file other proceedings that may be permissible. The order dated 13th May, 2013 is reproduced hereinbelow:-

―Present suit has been filed for partition, rendition of accounts and permanent injunction.
As this Court after hearing some arguments was of the view that present suit for partition was not maintainable, Mr. Bhupesh Narula, learned counsel for the plaintiff wishes to withdraw the present suit with liberty to avail other appropriate remedies that may be available to the plaintiff in accordance with law.
With the aforesaid liberty, present suit and applications are dismissed as withdrawn.‖
5. Mr. Bali stated that since the plaintiffs i.e. children of the defendant No. 4 derive their title from their father, if defendant No. 4 can file proceedings other than the partition suit, then his children who derive title from him, cannot file a partition suit.

6. He pointed out that the father of the plaintiffs i.e. defendant No.4 (Mr. Sandeep Gulati) had been involved in a murder case at the age of sixteen and the present suit had been filed by him through his two minor children from the third wife and that too without seeking any claim/share for his son from the first wife.

7. Learned senior counsel for defendants No.1, 2 and 5 stated that in 1947, late Sh. R.P. Gulati had migrated from Pakistan to India with his family members leaving behind all their belongings. He pointed out that while migrating to India all the family members were searched and they were not allowed to carry anything. He emphasized that late Sh. R.P. Gulati had arrived in India along with his family members with only the clothes which they were wearing, and thus it was very hard for him even to meet the basic needs of the family and due to the same, his eldest son Sh. D.L. Gulati, who was sixteen years of age at that time started working.

8. Mr. Bali stated that at the time of death of Sh. R.P. Gulati in 1971, he had no business and he was fully dependent upon his children, and therefore, no property or business was left by late Sh. R.P. Gulati. He contended that the question of inheriting any family business or coparcenary business did not arise. He showed an extract of the passbook of Mr. R.P. Gulati, which showed a balance of just Rs.4.15/- in August, 1970. He also referred to the Central Govt. Health Scheme Card of Sh. R.L. Gulati, son of late Sh. R.P. Gulati to show that he was dependant on his son for his own medical treatment.

9. Learned senior counsel for defendants No.1, 2 and 5-applicants contended that there was no averment in the plaint that Mr. R.P. Gulati, great grandfather of the plaintiffs, had succeeded to any property on demise of his father. He pointed out that there was not even a whisper in the plaint as to what properties were owned by the father of Mr. R.P. Gulati or even by Mr. R.P. Gulati himself. He emphasized that no details of any business or property being inherited by defendant No.1 on the death of Mr. R.P. Gulati had been mentioned in the plaint.

10. Mr. Bali submitted that coparcenary is a creation of law and cannot be created by an act of the parties. He pointed out that in the present case there was no coparcenary property specified or even named and no averment with regard to the hotchpotch or actual blending of properties by the parties. According to him, the only averments in the plaint were with regard to blending of income from salaries. He stated that all the three partnership firms mentioned in the plaint as businesses of the coparcenary had been formed after the death of Mr. R.P. Gulati in 1971.

11. In the alternative, Mr. Bali submitted that even if it was assumed that coparcenary/Hindu Undivided Family properties were in existence, no coparcenary survived in the present case as, according to the plaintiffs themselves, there had been four partitions. He pointed out that upon separation of two brothers of defendant No.1 there was a partition in 1971 and upon separation of third brother, there was another partition in September, 1974. Further, three brothers of defendant No.1 separated in April, 1989 and one son of the defendant No.1 separated and moved to Canada on 17th March, 2004.

12. According to him, when partition of a coparcenary takes place and shares of the members get ascertained, the coparcenary dissolves and thereafter any branch wise division/partition/sub-division is not permissible under Hindu law.

13. Learned senior counsel for defendants No.1, 2 and 5-applicants stated that the dispute in the present case is primarily with regard to a house situated at C-117, East of Kailash, New Delhi. He stated that the said house was purchased and is owned by defendant No.5, grandmother of the plaintiffs. In support of his contention, he relied upon the Agreement to Sell dated 06th May, 1978 as well as the receipt and Conveyance Deed dated 14th October, 1996.

14. He submitted that defendant No.5 being a female could not be a coparcener prior to 2005. He pointed out that it was the plaintiffs' own case that shares of males in 1989 partition were ascertained and no share was given to the females as they were not entitled to the same.

15. Mr. Bali contended that the plaintiffs have admitted to there being no Hindu Joint Family or Hindu Joint Family properties in the Memorandum of Settlement dated 17th March, 2004. He pointed out that by way of amendment application, the plaintiffs had partially challenged the said Memorandum of Settlement only to the extent that it affected their rights. He submitted that the plaintiffs cannot challenge it in a piecemeal manner. He stated that if the said family settlement was set aside, it would mean that Mr. Manit Gulati's (defendant No.3) separation would have to be set aside in its entirety.

16. He further submitted that the challenge to the said Memorandum of Settlement was beyond limitation and in support of his submission, he relied upon Section 7, Explanation II of the Limitation Act, 1963, which reads as under:-

―7. Disability of one of several persons.--Where one of several persons jointly entitled to institute a suit or make an application for the execution of a decree is under any such disability, and a discharge can be given without the concurrence of such person, time will run against them all; but, where no such discharge can be given, time will not run as against any of them until one of them becomes capable of giving such discharge without the concurrence of the others or until the disability has ceased.
Explanation I.-- This section applies to a discharge from every kind of liability, including a liability in respect of any immovable property.
Explanation II.-- For the purposes of this section, the manager of a Hindu undivided family governed by the Mitakshara law shall be deemed to be capable of giving a discharge without the concurrence of the other members of the family only if he is in management of the joint family property.
17. Learned senior counsel for defendants No.1, 2 and 5-applicants submitted that a suit for injunction against the Karta i.e. defendant No.1 is barred by provisions of Specific Relief Act, 1963 and no injunction could be passed against the Karta of a Hindu coparcenary as Karta is entitled to exclusive and entire possession.

18. Mr. Bali stated that the balance of convenience was entirely in favour of the defendants No.1, 2 and 5. He emphasised that Mr. Sandeep Gulati, father of the plaintiffs was in the possession of all cars of the family as well as the factory and warehouse which were yielding rental incomes. He contended that the mala fides of the plaintiffs would be apparent from the fact that defendant No. 4's business in China and house in Dwarka had not been made a part of the partition suit.

ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF PLAINTIFFS

19. Per contra, Mr. T.K. Ganju, learned senior counsel for plaintiffs submitted that despite the withdrawal of defendant No.4's suit being CS(OS) 886/2013, the present suit was maintainable as the right to demand partition and separate possession is a recurring right. In support of his submission, he relied upon the judgments of this Court in Sri Kishan Vs. Shri Ram Kishan & Ors., 2009 (110) DRJ 323 and Jai Devi Vs. Jodhi Ram, 1970 LawSuit(Del) 82.

20. He stated that prior to the disputes having arisen in 2010, the entire family i.e. the plaintiffs and the defendants were living together in the same house with a joint kitchen. He contended that the Family of defendant No.1 was a Hindu Joint Family as they had been joint in food, worship and estate. He submitted that there is a presumption in law that every Hindu family is a Hindu Joint Family which is joint in food, worship and estate, unless there is proof to the contrary. In support of his submission, he relied upon the judgment of Sanwal Das Vs. Kuremal & Ors. AIR 1928 Lah. 224 wherein it has been held, "....The presumption of Hindu law is that every Hindu family is joint in food, worship and estate, and that a party who desires to establish the contrary must prove it...."

21. Mr. Ganju emphasised that in the present case, the factum of existence of an HUF under the name of "K.S. Gulati and Sons HUF" was an admitted fact. In support of his contention, he referred to Kuldeep Singh Gulati and Sons HUF Pan card details along with acknowledgment from the Income Tax Department.

22. Mr. Ganju submitted that as soon as the defendant No.4 i.e. father of the minor plaintiffs was born in 1969, by operation of law, a coparcenary came into existence. In support of his submission, he relied upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in Rohit Chauhan Vs. Surinder Singh & Ors., (2013) 9 SCC 419 wherein it has been held as under:-

"11. ....It is not static. We are further of the opinion that so long, on partition an ancestral property remains in the hand of a single person, it has to be treated as a separate property and such a person shall be entitled to dispose of the coparcenary property treating it to be his separate property but if a son is subsequently born, the alienation made before the birth cannot be questioned. But, the moment a son is born, the property becomes a coparcenary property and the son would acquire interest in that and become a coparcener."
(emphasis supplied)
23. Learned senior counsel for the plaintiffs submitted that the aforesaid judgment in Rohit Chauhan Vs. Surinder Singh & Ors.(supra) had been reiterated subsequently in Danamma alias Suman Surpur & Anr. Vs. Amar & Ors., (2018) 3 SCC 343 and Shyam Narayan Prasad Vs. Krishna Prasad & Ors., (2018) 7 SCC 646.
24. Mr. Ganju stated that after the great grandfather of the plaintiffs i.e. Mr. R.P. Gulati came from Pakistan in 1947, he got compensation from the Settlement Commission for the family properties left behind in Pakistan and with this compensation, he started a joint family business, being a shoe business in Lajpat Nagar, New Delhi. In support of his contention, he referred to the Income Tax Assessment order dated 31st March, 1986.

25. He further stated that after Mr. R.P. Gulati's death, the members of his family i.e. his sons amongst themselves, carried on family business under three partnership firms i.e. (i) M/s. Ofag International, (ii) M/s. Pishori Traders and (iii) M/s. Lloyd Steel, wherein Mrs. Surinder Gulati-defendant No.5 i.e. grandmother of the plaintiffs, represented the family group of K.S. Gulati and Sons, as Mr. K.S. Gulati was in Government service at that point in time.

26. Mr. Ganju contended that from the income derived from the three joint family partnership firms, the K.S. Gulati joint family purchased a plot of land bearing No.C-117, East of Kailash, in the name of Mrs. Surinder Gulati-defendant No.5.

27. Mr. Ganju contended that since in the present case, the plaintiffs had shown a nucleus from which the Hindu Joint Family properties had been acquired, there arose a presumption in law that such properties were Hindu Joint Family properties unless proved to the contrary by the person claiming it to be his self acquired property. In support of his submission, he relied upon a judgment of the Supreme Court in Appasaheb Peerappa Chamdgade Vs. Devendra Peerappa Chamdgade & Ors., (2007) 1 SCC 521 wherein it has been held as under:-

" 13. ....But where it is established that the family possessed some joint property which from its nature and relative value may have formed the nucleus from which the property in question may have been acquired, the burden shifts to the party alleging self-acquisition to establish affirmatively that the property was acquired without the aid of the joint family property. Therefore, so far as the proposition of law is concerned, the initial burden is on the person who claims that it was joint family property but after initial discharge of the burden, it shifts to the party who claims that the property has been purchased by him through his own source and not from the joint family nucleus...."
28. Mr. Ganju stated that even if it is presumed that the plaintiffs had failed to prove the existence of a nucleus, then also as, in the present instance, the father and the son had worked together and created income and acquired properties with the help of their joint labour and effort--the said income and properties would be Hindu Joint Family properties unless proved to the contrary by the cogent evidence. He stated that the fact that defendants No.1, 2 and 4 had been working together in the family businesses since attaining majority and had been taking active part in the business of K.S. Gulati and Sons Hindu Joint Family since 1990 had been admitted by the defendants in C.P. No.06/1993. The relevant portion of the said reply affidavit by defendant No.1 relied upon by the learned senior counsel for plaintiffs is reproduced hereinbelow:-

"H. ....Naturally, the wives were only tax fronts and actual business was conducted by the husbands. The answering respondent looked after the technical side whereas the management of the various units was handled by his two brothers. Although the division of the shares of the Company amongst the three families was disproportionate, it was clearly understood that all the three had equal stakes therein like in the entire family business."
29. He contended that in view of the said fact, even the pre-existence of a nucleus was not necessary. In support of his submission, Mr. Ganju relied upon the following judgments:-

A. Sanwal Das Vs. Kuremal & Ors. AIR 1928 Lah. 224 wherein it has been held as under:-

" In Laldas Naraindas Vs. Motibai (6), it was held that, where a father and his sons acquire their property by their joint labours and are besides joint in food and worship, they must be regarded as having constituted a joint hindu family even though there may have been no nucleus of property which has come down to the father from his father or grandfather or great-grandfather. For the formation of a coparcenary in Hindu law, such a nucleus is not absolutely necessary, provided the persons constituting it stand in relationship of father and son or other relationship requisite for a coparcenary system."

B. Madanlal (Dead) By LRs. & Ors. Vs. Yoga Bai (Dead) By LRs., (2003) 5 SCC 89,wherein it has been held as under:

"4. .....Therefore, the High Court found that the question which was to be considered was as to whether the property acquired by the father and the sons by putting their efforts together in their family business would be amenable to partition at the instance of the sons or not. Referring to several decisions of different High Courts, namely, Bombay High Court, Oudh Chief Court, Madras High Court as well as the Andhra Pradesh High Court on the point, it came to the conclusion that the property in question was raised and developed by the joint efforts of Purandas and his sons and therefore it was joint family property, amenable to partition among the father and sons etc. We do not find any flaw in the conclusion drawn by the High Court on the point enumerated above.

xxx xxx xxx

6. .... It is sought to be established that they have been running their business separately under different partnerships. We feel that no such inference can be drawn. In a family which carries on a number of businesses, it is quite often that it is carried out under different names and styles and often constitutes different companies or partnerships for better handling of business or to keep it manageable or for various other reasons. It is no proof of separation nor are the letters which are sought to be relied upon, written to the Income Tax Authorities and the assessment orders passed by the Income Tax Authorities...."

30. Mr. Ganju submitted that the fact whether the thirteen properties claimed to be Hindu Joint Family properties were available for partition or not, was a question of fact which could be determined only after conducting a trial and not in an application under Order 7 Rule 11 CPC. In support of his submission, he relied upon the following judgments:-

A. Kamala & Ors. Vs. K.T. Eshwara Sa & Ors., (2008) 12 SCC 661 wherein it has been held as under:-

"21. Order 7 Rule 11(d) of the Code has limited application. It must be shown that the suit is barred under any law. Such a conclusion must be drawn from the averments made in the plaint. Different clauses in Order 7 Rule 11, in our opinion, should not be mixed up. Whereas in a given case, an application for rejection of the plaint may be filed on more than one ground specified in various sub-clauses thereof, a clear finding to that effect must be arrived at. What would be relevant for invoking clause (d) of Order 7 Rule 11 of the Code are the averments made in the plaint. For that purpose, there cannot be any addition or subtraction. Absence of jurisdiction on the part of a court can be invoked at different stages and under different provisions of the Code. Order 7 Rule 11 of the Code is one, Order 14 Rule 2 is another.

22. For the purpose of invoking Order 7 Rule 11(d) of the Code, no amount of evidence can be looked into. The issues on merit of the matter which may arise between the parties would not be within the realm of the court at that stage. All issues shall not be the subject-matter of an order under the said provision.

xxx xxx xxx

32. We may proceed on the assumption that the shares of the parties were defined. There was a partition amongst the parties in the sense that they could transfer their undivided share. What would, however, be the effect of a partition suit which had not been taken to its logical conclusion by getting the properties partitioned by metes and bounds is a question which, in our opinion, cannot be gone into in a proceeding under Order 7 Rule 11(d) of the Code. Whether any property is available for partition is itself a question of fact.

xxx xxx xxx

37. What would be its effect is again a question which cannot fall for determination under Order 7 Rule 11(d) of the Code. These facts require adjudication. The identity of the properties which were the subject-matter of the earlier suit vis-à-vis the properties which were subsequently acquired and the effect thereof is beyond the purview of Order 7 Rule 11(d) of the Code.

38. Whether the properties mentioned in the plaint are available for partition is essentially a question of fact. Whether an order of injunction was obtained on the basis of a misleading statement in the earlier suit or whether they were entitled therefor are not the questions which, in our opinion, can be gone into at this stage. Moreover, it is contended that some lands have been acquired by the Bangalore Development Authority. But, we do not know in whose favour the awards were made and even if somebody has received the awarded amount, what would be the effect thereof."

B. Ms. Ilaria Kapur Vs. Sh. Rakesh Kapur & Ors., 2012 SCC OnLine Del 3115, wherein it has been held as under: "21. Before embarking upon the merits of the respective contentions of the parties, it deserves to be highlighted that the scope and ambit of Order VII Rule 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure is a cabined and limited one. As held in Kamala's case(supra), the conclusion that the suit is barred under any law must be drawn from the averments made in the plaint. Further, for invoking Rule 11(d) of Order VII, no amount of evidence can be looked into. The issues on the merits of the matter which may arise between the parties would not be within the realm of the Court at that stage nor shall form the subject matter of an order under the said provision, in the aforesaid decision which also pertains to a partition suit, it was observed (AIR, page No. 3179):--

―whether any property is available for partition is itself a question of fact.‖

22. In the case of Kamala (supra), a suit was filed claiming partition in the properties. After the passing of the preliminary decree, no property was available for partition. The properties were possessed by the co-sharers independenty in accordance with the respective shares held by the co-sharers. Yet, the Supreme Court observed that what would be the effect of a partition suit which had not been taken to its logical conclusion by getting the properties partitioned by metes and bounds is a question which cannot be gone into in a proceeding under Order VII, Rule 11(d) of the Code. Whether any property is available for partition is itself a question of fact. Identity of properties which were subject matter of the earlier suit, vis-a-vis, properties which were subsequently acquired and effect thereof was beyond the purview of Order VII, Rule 11(d)."

31. Mr. Ganju lastly contended that the balance of convenience was entirely in favour of the plaintiffs. He stated that father of the plaintiffs had been acquitted in the murder case and, if the interim order was not continued, the plaintiffs would suffer irreparable loss and injury inasmuch as they may be ousted from the Hindu Joint Family properties in which they have a right and the same shall cause irreparable loss and injury to them.

REJOINDER ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF THE DEFENDANTS NO.1, 2 AND 5.

32. In rejoinder, Mr. Bali stated that the plaintiffs' submission that the parties were coparceners in a joint family property was predicated on a wrong assumption of law that property granted to an individual/displaced person at the time of partition retained the same characteristic of the property that was left by the displaced person/persons in Pakistan. He submitted that the property, if any, allotted in lieu of the property left in Pakistan under Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1954 was a grant and consequently, a self-acquired property of defendant No.1.

33. Learned senior counsel for defendants No.1, 2 and 5 further submitted that the Lahore High Court in Sanwal Das Vs. Kuremal & Ors. (supra) erroneously held, by differing from three earlier judgments of the Lahore High Court, that when father and son work together, properties acquired would be Hindu Joint Family properties. He submitted that the Supreme Court in the following three judgements has held to the contrary :-

i) Appasheb Peerappa Chamdgagde Vs. Devender Peerappa Chamdgade and Others, (2007) 1 SCC 521
ii) Mudi Gowda Gowdappa Sankh Vs. Ram Chandra Ravagowda Sankh, (1969) 1 SCC 386
iii) D.S. Lakshmaiah and Anr. Vs. I. Balasubramanyam and Anr., (2003) 10 SCC 310.
34. Learned senior counsel for defendants No.1, 2 and 5 submitted that in a subsequent judgment of Uttam Vs. Saubhag Singh, (2016) 4 SCC 68, it has been specifically held that Rohit Chauhan's (supra) judgment is not good law.

35. Mr. Bali further stated that there is no averment in the plaint to the effect that the grandfather (defendant No.1) and the father (defendant No.4) of the plaintiffs had worked together and created income and acquired properties with the help of their joint labour and effort.

36. Learned senior counsel for defendants No.1, 2 and 5 lastly contended that though the plaintiffs were aware of the reply to the company petition being Co.Pet.6/1993 prior to the institution of the suit, yet there was no averment in the plaint with regard to the Company Law Board proceeding. Consequently, he submitted that the said allegation cannot be examined by the Court while dealing with an Order 7 Rule 11 CPC application.

COURT'S REASONING THE APPROACH TO BE ADOPTED BY THE COURTS WHILE DEALING WITH AN ORDER 7 RULE 11 CPC APPLICATION

37. Order 7 Rule 11 CPC lays down six grounds on which a plaint can be rejected. Though it is settled law that while deciding such an application what has to be seen are the averments made in the plaint, yet the sine qua non is that pleadings must contain all requisite factual ingredients of a cause of action. This Court is of the view that it is the bounden duty and obligation of every court, while deciding an Order 7 Rule 11 CPC application, to carefully scrutinize the pleadings and the documents on which the pleadings are predicated. The Supreme Court has highlighted the requirement to read the pleadings meaningfully in view of the relied upon documents and see that the same are not illusionary or vexatious. The Apex Court in T. Arivandandam Vs. T.V. Satyapal and Another, (1977) 4 SCC 467 has held as under:-

―5. We have not the slightest hesitation in condemning the petitioner for the gross abuse of the process of the court repeatedly and unrepentantly resorted to. From the statement of the facts found in the judgment of the High Court, it is perfectly plain that the suit now pending before the First Munsif's Court, Bangalore, is a flagrant misuse of the mercies of the law in receiving plaints. The learned Munsif must remember that if on a meaningful -- not formal -- reading of the plaint it is manifestly vexatious, and meritless, in the sense of not disclosing a clear right to sue, he should exercise his power under Order 7, Rule 11 CPC taking care to see that the ground mentioned therein is fulfilled. And, if clever drafting has created the illusion of a cause of action, nip it in the bud at the first hearing by examining the party searchingly under Order 10, CPC. An activist Judge is the answer to irresponsible law suits. The trial courts would insist imperatively on examining the party at the first hearing so that bogus litigation can be shot down at the earliest stage. The Penal Code is also resourceful enough to meet such men, (Cr. XI) and must be triggered against them. In this case, the learned Judge to his cost realised what George Bernard Shaw remarked on the assassination of Mahatma Gandhi:
―It is dangerous to be too good.‖ (emphasis supplied)
38. The Supreme Court in I.T.C. Limited Vs. Debts Recovery Appellate Tribunal and Others, (1998) 2 SCC 70 has held as under:-
―16. The question is whether a real cause of action has been set out in the plaint or something purely illusory has been stated with a view to get out of Order 7 Rule 11 CPC. Clever drafting creating illusions of cause of action are not permitted in law and a clear right to sue should be shown in the plaint. (See T. Arivandandam v. T.V. Satyapal[(1977) 4 SCC 467] .) xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx
27. As stated above, non-movement of goods by the seller could be due to a variety of tenable or untenable reasons, the seller may be in breach of the contract but that by itself does not permit a plaintiff to use the word ―fraud‖ in the plaint and get over any objections that may be raised by way of filing an application under Order 7 Rule 11 CPC. As pointed out by Krishna Iyer, J. in T. Arivandandam case [(1977) 4 SCC 467], the ritual of repeating a word or creation of an illusion in the plaint can certainly be unravelled and exposed by the Court while dealing with an application under Order 7 Rule 11(a). Inasmuch as the mere allegation of drawal of monies without movement of goods does not amount to a cause of action based on ―fraud‖, the Bank cannot take shelter under the words ―fraud‖ or ―misrepresentation‖ used in the plaint.‖ (emphasis supplied)
39. Even, in Kamala & Ors. Vs. K.T. Eshwara Sa & Ors. (supra) as well as Ms. Ilaria Kapur Vs. Sh. Rakesh Kapur & Ors. (supra) it has been held that a plaint can be rejected under Order 7 Rule 11 CPC if the averments made in the plaint on their face disclose no cause of action and/or if the same disclose a cause of action, the same is barred by any law. In the judgments cited by learned senior counsel for the plaintiffs, the earlier Supreme Court judgments in T. Arivandandam Vs. T.V. Satyapal and Another (supra) and I.T.C. Limited Vs. Debts Recovery Appellate Tribunal and Others (supra) have neither been set aside nor dissented or distinguished.
ORDER 6 RULE 4 CPC IS ATTRACTED TO SUITS WHERE THE PLAINTIFF CLAIMS THAT A COPARCENARY OR HUF EXISTS, AS AFTER COMING INTO FORCE OF THE HINDU SUCCESSION ACT, 1956, THERE IS NO PRESUMPTION AS TO THE EXISTENCE OF AN HUF.

40. A learned Single Judge of this Court in the case of Surender Kumar Vs. Dhani Ram & Ors. 227 (2016) DLT 217 has held that Order 6 Rule 4 CPC is attracted to suits where the plaintiff claims that a coparcenary or HUF exists, as after coming into force of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 (hereinafter referred to as 'Act, 1956'), there is no presumption as to the existence of an HUF. Consequently, detailed facts have to be averred. The averments have to be made by factual references qua each property claimed to be an HUF property as to how the same is an HUF property. The relevant portion of the said judgment is reproduced hereinbelow:-

―9. I would like to further note that it is not enough to aver a mantra, so to say, in the plaint simply that a joint Hindu family or HUF exists. Detailed facts as required by Order 6 Rule 4, CPC as to when and how the HUF properties have become HUF properties must be clearly and categorically averred. Such averments have to be made by factual references qua each property claimed to be an HUF property as to how the same is an HUF property, and, in law generally bringing in any and every property as HUF property is incorrect as there is known tendency of litigants to include unnecessarily many properties as HUF properties, and which is done for less than honest motives. Whereas prior to passing of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 there was a presumption as to the existence of an HUF and its properties, but after passing of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 in view of the ratios of the judgments of the Supreme Court in the cases of Chander Sen (supra) and Yudhister (supra), there is no such presumption that inheritance of ancestral property creates an HUF, and therefore, in such a post 1956 scenario a mere ipse dixit statement in the plaint that an HUF and its properties exist is not a sufficient compliance of the legal requirement of creation or existence of HUF properties inasmuch as it is necessary for existence of an HUF and its properties that it must be specifically, stated that as to whether the HUF came into existence before 1956 or after 1956 and if so how and in what manner giving all requisite factual details. It is only in such circumstances where specific facts are mentioned to clearly plead a cause of action of existence of an HUF and its properties, can a suit then be filed and maintained by a person claiming to be a coparcener for partition of the HUF properties."
(emphasis supplied)
41. A Division Bench of this Court in Sagar Gambhir Vs. Sukhdev Singh Gambhir and Ors., 241 (2017) DLT 98 has endorsed the said view.
The relevant portion of the Division Bench's judgment is reproduced hereinbelow:-

―5. The defendants filed IA No. 1325/2012 invoking Order VII Rule 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure pleading that the averments in the plaint did not disclose a cause of action.
6. Vide impugned order dated May 06, 2016, relying upon the decision of the Supreme Court reported as (1987) 1 SCC 204Yudhihster v. Ashok Kumar, and two decisions of this Court reported as 225 (2015) DLT 211 Sunny (Minor) v. Sh. Raj Singh and 227 (2016) DLT 217 Surinder Kumar v. Dhani Ram the learned Single Judge has held that the pleadings were illusory and did not disclose a cause of action. The suit has been dismissed, and we treat this to be a misnomer for the reason if a plaint does not disclose a cause of action it has to be rejected. Qua challenge to the will, the learned Single Judge has held that this would be a separate cause of action and a separate suit could be filed.
11. .......the Supreme Court laid emphasis that Courts must accord due attention to the pleadings, and in civil cases pertaining to property, must accord the necessary consideration to the admitted documents filed by the parties and highlighted that this care would prevent many a false claims from sailing beyond the stage of issues. In paragraph 73 to 79 of the opinion, the Supreme Court highlighted that suspicious pleadings, incomplete pleadings and pleadings not supported by documents would not even warrant issues to be settled. Thus, the said observations of the Supreme Court would be very relevant in the instant case.
15. The pleadings by the appellant is only to the effect that the property at Rajinder Nagar was purchased by the grandfather of the appellant from out of the funds of the firm M/s. Gian Singh Sukhdev Singh which was set up by the late grandfather of the appellant and that the funds for the business came from the properties left behind in Pakistan. No details or particulars of the properties left behind at Pakistan have been pleaded. We take judicial notice of the fact that post-partition, people who migrated to India from the territories of the newly State of Pakistan were required to file claims before the custodian of evacuee properties and upon proof of properties left behind in Pakistan, compensations were assessed. These people were treated as refugees and either money or an immovable property was allotted to these refugees by the Ministry of Rehabilitation, Government of India. In the plaint the lack of pleadings to said effect cannot be overlooked. There is thus a bald assertion without any material particulars regarding the firm M/s. Gian Singh Sukhdev Singh being set up by the great grandfather of the appellant. The appellant has himself filed documents, and one of which is an income-tax assessment order for the Assessment Year 1957-58 concerning the income-tax return of the defendant No.
1. The same shows that the business of M/s. Gian Singh Sukhdev Singh was the sole proprietary business of defendant No. 1 and the source of funds to acquire the property in Rajinder Nagar was from the income generated from the firm. This document being filed by the appellant could be looked into by the learned Single Judge and the only error in the impugned order would be one of narrative of fact wherein said document has been referred to as relied upon by the defendants. It is a case where the appellant as well as the defendants relied upon the documents."
(emphasis supplied) THERE EXISTS A DISTINCTION BETWEEN A COPARCENARY PROPERTY AND A HINDU JOINT FAMILY PROPERTY.
42. A Mitakshara coparcenary is a body of individuals having been created by law, unlike a joint family which can be constituted by an agreement of parties. The Supreme Court in Hardeo Rai Vs. Sakuntala Devi and Others, (2008) 7 SCC 46 has held as under:-

―19. We may at the outset notice the characteristics of a Mitakshara coparcenary from the decision of this Court whereupon Mr Rai has placed strong reliance being SBI v. Ghamandi Ram [(1969) 2 SCC 33 : AIR 1969 SC 1330]. Therein this Court was concerned with a notification issued by the Government of Pakistan in terms of Section 45 of the Pakistan (Administration of Evacuee Property) Ordinance, 1949. We may, however, notice the dicta laid down therein: (Ghamandi Ram case [(1969) 2 SCC 33 : AIR 1969 SC 1330] , SCC pp. 36- 37, para 5) ―5. According to the Mitakshara School of Hindu Law all the property of a Hindu joint family is held in collective ownership by all the coparceners in a quasi-corporate capacity. The textual authority of the Mitakshara lays down in express terms that the joint family property is held in trust for the joint family members then living and thereafter to be born (see Mitakshara, Chapter I, pp. 1-27). The incidents of coparcenership under the Mitakshara Law are: first, the lineal male descendants of a person up to the third generation, acquire on birth ownership in the ancestral properties of such person; secondly, that such descendants can at any time work out their rights by asking for partition; thirdly, that till partition each member has got ownership extending over the entire property conjointly with the rest; fourthly, that as a result of such co-ownership the possession and enjoyment of the properties is common;
fifthly, that no alienation of the property is possible unless it be for necessity, without the concurrence of the coparceners, and sixthly, that the interest of a deceased member lapses on his death to the survivors. A coparcenary under the Mitakshara School is a creature of law and cannot arise by act of parties except insofar that on adoption the adopted son becomes a coparcener with his adoptive father as regards the ancestral properties of the latter.‖ (emphasis supplied) THERE IS A DIFFERENCE BETWEEN PARTNERSHIP AND HINDU JOINT FAMILY FIRM.

43. There is also a difference between partnership and Hindu Joint Family firm. Mulla in his Treatise Hindu Law 21 st Edition has pointed out the following points of difference between partnership and Hindu Joint Family firm:-

―In a joint family business no member of the family can say that he is the owner of one-half, one-third or one-forth. The essence of joint Hindu family property is unity of ownership and community of interest and the shares of the members are not defined‖.
44. The Supreme Court in Nanchand Gangaram Shetji Vs. Mallappa Mahalingappa Sadalge & Ors.; (1976) 2 SCC 429 has held as under:-

―37.......In a joint Hindu family business, no member of the family can say that he is the owner of one-half, one-third or one- fourth. The essence of joint Hindu family property is unity of ownership and community of interest, and the shares of the members are not defined. Similarly, the pattern of the accounts of a joint Hindu family business maintained by the karta is different from those of a partnership. In the case of the former the shares of the individual members in the profits and losses are not worked out, while they have to be worked out in the case of partnership accounts.‖ (emphasis supplied)
45. Consequently, a partnership property cannot be a Hindu Joint Family Property.

THERE IS NO PRESUMPTION THAT A BUSINESS STANDING IN THE NAME OF ANY MEMBER OF THE JOINT FAMILY IS A JOINT FAMILY BUSINESS.

46. It is also settled law that there is no presumption that a business standing in the name of any member of the joint family is a joint family business. The Supreme Court in P.S.Sairam & Anr. Vs. P.S.Rama Rao Pissey & Ors. (2004) 11 SCC 320 has held as under:-

―7. Crucial question in the present appeal is as to whether business which was conducted by defendant No.1 was his separate business or it belonged to joint family, consisting of himself and his sons. It is well settled that so far as immovable property is concerned, in case the same stands in the name of individual member, there would be a presumption that the same belongs to joint family, provided it is proved that the joint family had sufficient nucleus at the time of its acquisition, but no such presumption can be applied to business. Reference in this connection may be made to a decision of this Court in the case of G.Narayana Raju v.G.Chamaraju:AIR 1968 SC 1276 wherein in a suit for partition defence was taken that business of Ambika Stores was separate business of defendant as the business did not grow out of joint family funds or at least by efforts of members of joint family which was accepted by the trial court as well as the High Court. When the matter was brought to this Court in appeal, upholding the judgment of the High Court, the Court observed thus at page 466:- (AIR p. 1278, para 3) "It is well established that there is no presumption under Hindu Law that a business standing in the name of any member of the joint family is a joint family business even if that member is the manager of the joint family. Unless it could be shown that the business in the hands of the coparcener grew up with the assistance of the joint family property or joint family funds or that the earnings of the business were blended with the joint family estate, the business remains free and separate."
(emphasis supplied)
47. There are observations to the same effect in G. Narayana Raju (Dead) By His Legal Representative Vs. G. Chamaraju and Others, AIR 1968 SC 1276 and Bhuru Mal Vs. Jagannath and Others, AIR 1942 PC 13.
THERE IS A PRESUMPTION THAT EVERY HINDU FAMILY WHICH IS JOINT IN FOOD AND WORSHIP IS A HINDU JOINT FAMILY; BUT THERE IS NO PRESUMPTION THAT THE ESTATE IS JOINT OR THE PROPERTY IS THE HINDU JOINT FAMILY PROPERTY. THE PARTY WHO ASSERTS THAT THE PROPERTY IS HINDU JOINT FAMILY PROPERTY HAS TO PROVE IT.

48. In the opinion of this Court, there is a presumption that every Hindu Family which is joint in food and worship is a Joint Family; but there is no presumption that the Estate is joint or that the properties of the family members belong to the Hindu Joint Family. The party who asserts that the property is joint family property has to prove it.

49. Mulla in his Treatise Hindu Law states as under:-

"Para 231- Mulla's Hindu Law - 21st Edition
1) Presumption that a joint family continues joint - Generally speaking, 'the normal state of every Hindu family is joint. Presumably every such family is joint in food, worship and estate.' In the absence of proof of division, such is the legal presumption.
2) No presumption that a joint family possesses joint property
- There is no presumption that a family, because it is joint, possesses joint property or any property. When in a suit for partition, a party claims that any particular item of the property is joint family property, or when in a suit for a mortgage, a party contends that the property mortgaged is joint family property, the burden of proving it rests on the party asserting it."
(emphasis supplied)
50. In Makhan Singh (Dead) By LRs. Vs. Kulwant Singh, (2007) 10 SCC 602, the Apex Court has held as under:-
"7. ......In this connection the judgment in D.S. Lakshmaiah case becomes relevant. It had been observed that a property could not be presumed to be a joint Hindu family property merely because of the existence of a joint Hindu family and raised an ancillary question in the following terms: (SCC p. 314, para 7) ―7. The question to be determined in the present case is as to who is required to prove the nature of property whether it is joint Hindu family property or self-acquired property of the first appellant.‖