1. The question referred to this larger Bench is one of great importance in respect of the rights of inheritance to females governed by the Marumakkathayam law in Kerala. The question is whether Section 17 of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 which deals with succession to females continues to be in force and operative notwithstanding the commencement of the Kerala Joint Hindu Family System (Abolition) Act, 1975 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Joint Family Abolition Act, 1975'). A learned single Judge of this Court in Madhavi Amma v. Kalliani Amma, (1988) 2 Ker LT 964 and a Division Bench of this Court in Bhaskaran v. Kalliani, (1990) 2 Ker LT 749, have taken the view that the above-said Section 17 of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 continues to be in force notwithstanding the Joint Family Abolition Act, 1975. It is the correctness of the said decisions that falls for consideration before us.

2. The basic facts are not in dispute and are as follows: The property in question belongs to one Lakshmikutty Amma, who belonged to a Nair family and who died on 18-2-1982 leaving behind her, her husband (plaintiff) and her mother, one Chellamma. The dispute is in regard to the succession to the property held by Lakshmikutty Amma on the date of her death on 18-2-19.82. Her husband is claiming as legal heir under Section 15 of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 on the basis that the effect of the Joint Family Abolition Act, 1975 was to make Section 17 of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 inoperative. The contest on the other side is raised by defendants 1 to 8 who are the legal heirs of Lakshmikutty Amma's mother, Chellamma, the said Chellamma having died on 8-9-1982 subsequent to Lakshmikutty Amma's death. Defendants 1 to 8 claim that their mother, Chellamma became the legal heir to the property of her daughter by virtue of Section 17 of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956. They contend that Section 17 continues to be operative even after the passing of the Joint Family Abolition Act, 1975. There is no dispute that the plaintiff married Lakshmikutty Amma in April, 1973 and the defendants 1 to 8 are the brothers and sisters of Lakshmikutty Amma and children of Chellamma. 9th defendant is the paternal uncle of late Lakshmikutty Amma.

3. The suit was filed for a declaration of title by the plaintiff over plaint A Schedule properties except in regard to the building in item 4 of plaint A Schedule and plaint B Schedule amounts deposited in Bank by Lakshmikutty Amma. Admittedly, items 1, 2, 3 and 5 of plaint A Schedule belong to said Lakshmikutty Amma while plaint B Schedule were deposits in her name. Item 4 in the plaint A Schedule is a building in item 3 alleged to have been put up by defendants subsequent to the death of Lakshmikutty Amma while item 2 is a building in item 1 of plaint A Schedule. According to the plaintiff, items 1, 3 and 5 were acquired by deceased Lakshmikutty Amma with the funds supplied by him and the amounts mentioned in plaint B Schedule are deposited by him in the State Bank of India, Changanacherry branch in the name of the deceased and that on her death, defendants 1 to 8 have trespassed into the plaint A Schedule properties. It may be noted that Chellamma had filed OP 71 of 1982 before the Sub Court, Kottayam for grant of a succession certificate in respect of plaint B Schedule amounts. The plaintiff got himself impleaded therein and opposed the said application and the said O.P. was dismissed. Chellamma having subsequently died, defendants 1 to 8 got themselves impleaded as additional petitioners in the said application. While the O.P. was pending, the present suit had been filed by the plaintiff and it was because of the filing of the present suit that the O.P. was dismissed declaring that the said dismissal will be subject to the result of the suit. Though an appeal was filed before the Sub Court against the judgment in the O.P., that was also dismissed reserving the rights of the parties to be governed by the judgment in the suit. As already stated, the plaintiff relied on Section 15 of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 while the defendants relied upon Section 17 of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956,

4. Defendants have filed a joint written statement contending that the plaint A Schedule items were the self-acquisition of late Lakshmikutty Amma and that plaintiff has not given any money for the acquisition of these properties.

5. The trial Court held that plaint A Schedule items 1, 2, 3 and 5 and the deposits shown in plaint B Schedule were the separate properties of Lakshmikutty Amma and that item 4 of plaint A Schedule was unauthorisedly put up in item 3 by the defendants after the death of Lakshmikutty Amma. The trial Court also held that Section 15 of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 applied and that Section 17 was no longer applicable after the passing of the Joint Family Abolition Act, 1975 and that, therefore, Chellamma could not have claimed any right to the property on the death of her daughter Lakshmikutty Amma and that it was the plaintiff who could claim the property. It was, therefore, held that the plaintiff had title to plaint A Schedule items 1, 2, 3 and 5 and in regard to plaint B Schedule amounts as the legal heir of his wife Lakshmikutty Amma and a decree for possession was granted for plaint A and B Schedules. Defendants were directed to remove item 4 of plaint A Schedule within two months from the date of judgment and on failure the plaintiff was allowed to have it removed through the Execution Court at the expenses of the fourth defendant. It is against this judgment that the defendants have preferred this appeal.

6. In this appeal, it is not in dispute that plaint A Schedule properties (except item 4) belong to Lakshmikutty Amma. It is on that basis that we have to consider whether Section 15 would help the plaintiff-respondent or whether Section 17 would help the defendants-appellants.

7. Elaborate arguments have been addressed for the appellants by learned Counsel, Sri M. Krishnan Nair and by counsel for the respondents, Sri C. K. Sivasankara Panicker. As the matter is of considerable importance affecting all those who had been governed by the Marumakkathayam law, we requested other senior members of the Bar to address us if they so desired. Pursuant to our request, Sri Jagadeeshchandran Nair, Sri T. P. Kelu Nambiar and Sri S. Venkatasubramanya Iyer submitted elaborate arguments before us supporting the contention of the appellants that Section 17 continues to operate even after the passing of the Joint Family Abolition Act, 1975. We are thankful to them as also to counsel who appeared in the case for the very valuable assistance given to us.

8. It will be noticed that the Marumakkathayam system of law was applicable in the South-Western coast of India, in areas which have now become part of the State of Kerala and in some parts which are now within the State of Karnataka and the State of Tamil Nadu. What we decide in this case is meant to apply within the State of Kerala inasmuch as the Joint Family Abolition Act, 1975 extends its operation only within the State of Kerala. We shall now set out the contentions of learned Counsel on both sides.

9. It is the contention for the appellants-defendants that Section 17 of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956, which relates to the succession to a female dying after the commencement of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 and who would have been governed by the Marumakkathayam law had the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 not been passed, continues to be governed by Section 17 and that the abolition of right by birth, right of survival ship, pious obligation etc. and the abolition of the Travancore Nair Act etc. by the Joint Family Abolition Act, 1975 has no bearing on Section 17 of the Hindu Succession Act. It is also agreed that the principle of Incorporation or Reference is not attracted to Section 17 of the Hindu Succession Act. That Section merely referes to the persons who are governed by the Marumakkathayam law on the date of the commencement of the Hindu Succession Act and once that group is identified, they will be governed by Section 17 of the Hindu Succession Act and the Joint Family Abolition Act, 1975 cannot indirectly make Section 17 inoperative. Their contention further is that the Statement of Objects and Reasons and the reports of the State Law Commission which preceded the enactment indicate clearly that the State Legislature while passing the Joint Family Abolition Act, 1975 did not intend to disturb the continued operation of Section 17 of the Hindu Succession Act.

10. On the other hand, it is contended by learned Counsel for the respondent-plaintiff that Section 17 of the Hindu Succession Act must be treated as an express amendment to the Travancore Nair Act and other State enactments dealing with succession and on the repeal of the Travancore Nair Act by Section 7(2) of the Joint Family Abolition Act, 1975, Section 17 gets expressly repealed even otherwise it gets impliedly repealed on the passing of the Joint Family Abolition Act, 1975. Alternatively, the principle of Incorporation or Reference applies to Section 17 of the Hindu Succession Act and that the Marumakkathayam law mentioned in Section 17 must be treated as changing from time to time depending upon whatever changes were brought in the said law by the State Legislature and that once the Joint Family Abolition Act, 1975 was passed, the said Marumakkathayam law came to be totally abolished both under Section 7(1) and Section 7(2) of the said Act, and therefore, Section became inoperative. It is also contended that the Hindu Succession Act and (for example) the Travancore Nair Act (insofar as it relates to succession) are in pari materia or are supplements to each other and, therefore, the effect of the repeal of the Travancore Nair Act (and other laws) has to be carried into Section 17 of the Hindu Succession Act. Once that is done, Section 17 becomes inoperative inasmuch as there is no person, after the passing of the Joint Family Abolition Act, 1975, governed by the Marumakkathayam law. That would make Section 17 of the Hindu Succession Act inoperative.

11. On the basis of the above contentions, the following points arise for consideration :

(1) What are the changes, relevant to the present case, made in the Marumakkathayam law from time to time by the Parliament or by the Kerala State Legislature?

(2) Whether the Kerala State Legislature, when it made a legislation under Entry 5 of List III to the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of India by passing the Joint Family Abolition Act, 1975, intended to trench upon Section 17 of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 which was a law passed by the Parliament under the same Entry in relation to testamentary and intestate matters?

(3) Whether Section 17 of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 incorporates an amendment into the Travancore Nair Act and other Statutes and whether subsequent to the repeal of the Travancore Nair Act and other State laws by the State Legislature and by virtue of Section 7(2) of the Joint Family Abolition Act, 1975, Section 17 of the Hindu Succession Act stands repealed by virtue of the operation of Article 254(2) of the Constitution of India?

(4) Whether Section 17 of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 becomes inoperative after the passing of the Joint Family Abolition Act, 1975 and if so, to what categories of persons it applies and to what categories of persons it does not apply?

(5) What is the position of those persons who were born on or after 1-12-1976 when the Joint Family Abolition Act, 1975 came into force?

12. Point No. 1 :-- Under this point, we shall make a brief survey of the changes made in the Marumakkathayam system of inheritance and with particular reference to the facts of this case. We shall, however, extract the relevant statutory provisions while dealing with Point No. 2.

12A. It has to be noticed that the Marumakkathayam system of inheritance means the system of inheritance by descent from a common ancestress. It is called a matrilineal system of inheritance and is somewhat different from the patrilineal system of inheritance in the various branches of Hindu law. Various principles of succession were being applied both when a male died or a female died, in the South-Western parts of this country and these principles of succession were generally treated as Marumakkathayam system of inheritance. Before the States Reorganisation Act of 1956 was passed, several legislations had been made by the Provincial Legislatures both in the former State of Travancore and Cochin and former State of Madras to amend the pristline Marumakkathayam law not only in regard to succession but also in regard to marriage, divorce, joint family management etc. The said Statutes were, therefore, governing the law relating to testamentary and intestate succession among Nairs, Ezhavas and other communities. The Nairs were governed by the Travancore Nair Act, II of 1100 while the Ezhavas were governed by the Travancore Ezhava Act, III of 1100 and so on.

13. In 1955 and 1956 Parliament came forward with four important Statutes governing Hindus, namely, the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955; the Hindu Succession Act, 1956; the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956 and the Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act, 1956. These Acts were passed after considerable debate over several years. So far as the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 was concerned, it contained certain provisions amending or modifying the existing law relating to testamentary and intestate successions which were till then governed by the Travancore Nair Act or the Travancore Ezhava Act etc. For the aforesaid purposes, the Hindu Succession Act introduced a definition of 'Marumakkathayam law' in Section 3(h) and modified the law of succession in certain respects in Sections 7, 17 and 30 of the said Act. While Section 7 related to the devolution in respect of the undivided interest of a person in the property of a tarwad, tavazhee, kutumba, kavaru or illom, Section 17 made a separate provision in relation to succession to property of males or females who would have been governed by the Marumakkathayam law if the Hindu Succession Act had not been passed. So far as succession to females, with which we are concerned, Section 17 stated that provisions of Section 15 relating to succession to a female will have to be applied in the manner mentioned in Section 17(ii). Section 30 of the Act contains an Explanation permitting interest of a member of a tarwad, tavazhi, illom, kutumba or kavaru to be capable of being disposed of by male or female in accordance with the provisions of Indian Succession Act, 1925 or any other law for the time being in force and applicable to Hindus.

14. Taking the example of the present case, it will be noticed that if Lakshmikutty Amma, on her death, was governed by the Hindu Succession Act, her mother would be her legal heir under Section 17(ii)(a) inasmuch as under that clause, the legal heirs of the properties of the females are only the sons and daughters and the mother. In the present case, since Lakshmikutty Amma did not have sons or daughters, the property would go under Section 17(ii)(a) to her mother, Chellamma. Succession to a female on her death under the Travancore Nair Act in a case where the deceased had no male or female children, would have been governed by Section 18 of the Travancore Nair Act. That Section stated that on the death of a Nair female leaving no lineal descendants surviving her, the whole of the self-acquired and separate property left undisposed of by her at her death shall devolve on her mother's tavazhee. Section 2(3) of the Travancore Nair Act had defined "Thavazhee of a female" as "a group of persons consisting of that female and her issue how-low-so-ever in the female line, or such of that group as are alive". In other words, before the passing of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956, if a Nair female died without leaving any male or female lineal descendants surviving her, her property would have gone to her mother and the mother's issues how-low-so-ever in the female line, or such of that group as are alive. This succession was altered under Section 17 of the Hindu Succession Act to the extent that instead of the property devolving on the mother's thavazhee, it would devolve on the mother alone.

15. We can notice that the other sub Sections of Section 17 brought about similar changes in the law of succession mentioned in the Travancore Nair Act and other laws in relation to succession to males or females who died after the commencement of the Hindu Succession Act and who were, before the said Act, governed by the Marumakkathayam law of succession as specified in the Travancore Nair Act. The question before us is whether upon the passing of the Joint Family Abolition Act, 1975, Section 17 of the Hindu Succession Act stood either repealed expressly or on account of repugnancy or on account of its becoming inoperative. We think that the aforesaid discussion of the general changes made in the Marumakkathayam system of inheritance will be sufficient to understand our discussion under Points 2 to 5. Point No. 1 is decided accordingly.

16. Point No. 2:-- As stated earlier, Lakshmikutty Amma, in the present case, belong to a Nair family. The dispute is in relation to succession to her property on her death on 18-2-1982. The question depends upon whether Section 17 of the Hindu Succession Act applies or whether the said Section has become repugnant on the passing of the Kerala Joint Hindu Family system (Abolition) Act, 1975, in view of Article. 254(2) of the Constitution of India. For the purpose of deciding that question, it is necessary to refer to the relevant statutory provisions contained in the Travancore Nair Act (Regulation II of 1100), the relevant provisions of the Hindu Succession Act, 1956 and the relevant provisions of the Kerala Joint Hindu Family System (Abolition) Act, 1975.

17. As stated in Point No, 1, at one point of time, the succession was governed by pristine Marumakkathayam law. Subsequently, the succession came to be governed by the Travancore Nair Act (Regulation II of 1100). That Act dealt with the following subjects : marriage and its dissolution (Chapter II), maintenance and guardianship (Chapter III), intestate succession (Chapter IV), testamentary succession (Chapter V), the tarwad and its management (Chapter VI), partition of tarwad property (Chapter VII) and impartible tarwads (Chapter VIII). Chapter I dealt with definitions. Section 1(2) stated that the Travancore Nair Act would apply to all Nairs domiciled in Travancore, and to such Nairs not so domiciled and non-Nairs, whether so domiciled or not, as have, or shall have, marital relation with Nairs domiciled in Travancore. Section 2(2) defines 'marumakkathayam' as the system of inheritance in which descent is traced in the female line. Chapter IV which dealt with intestate succession contained Sections 11 to 22. Intestate succession on the death of a Nair male was governed by Sections 11 to 16. Intestate succession on the death of a female member of a Nair family was governed by Sections 17 to 20. Sections 21 to 23 dealt with certain other connected matters relating to succession. Testamentary succession in Chapter V was governed by a single Section , that is Section 24. There was a saving provision in Section 44 in Chapter IX dealing with supplemental provisions, which reads as follows :

"44. Nothing in this Regulation shall --

(a) affect the existing rules of marumakkathayam law, custom or usage except to the extent hereinbefore expressly provided for; or ....."

From the provisions of the above Travancore Nair Act, it is clear that the said Act made provisions in regard to marriage and its dissolution, maintenance and guardianship, intestate succession, testamentary succession, tarwad and its management, partition of tarwad property and impartible tarwads. It also provided in Section 44 that the rule of Marumakkathayam law, custom, usage, except to the extent hereinbefore expressly provided for, would be saved.

18. After the commencement of the Constitution of India, provisions were made in the Concurrent List (List III) permitting Parliament or the State Legislature to make various laws in regard to intestate succession and also certain other matters. It is necessary to refer to Entry 5 of List III of the 7th Schedule to the Constitution of India, which reads as follows :

"Marriage and divorce; infants and minors; adoption; Wills, intestacy and succession; joint family and partition; all matters in respect of which parties in judicial proceedings were immediately before the commencement of this Constitution subject to their personal law."

So far as "Wills, intestacy and succession" are concerned, Parliament passed the Hindu Succession Act, 1956. The said Act came into force with effect from 18-6-1956. Section 2 of the said Act stated that the said Act would apply to any person, who is a Hindu by religion in any of its forms or developments, including a Virashaiva, a Lingayat or a follower of the Brahmo, Prarthana or Arya Samaj, and to any person who is a Buddhist, Jains or Sikh by religion, and to any other person who is not a Muslim, Christian, Parsi or Jew by religion, unless it was proved that any such person would not have been governed by the Hindu law or by any custom or usage as part of that law in respect of any of the matters dealt with herein if this Act had not been passed. Section 3(h) defines 'Marumakkathayam law' as follows :

"3(h): "Marumakkathayam law" means the system of law applicable to persons --

(a) who if this Act had not been passed, would have been governed by the Madras Marumakkathayam Act, 1932 (Madras Act XXII of 1933); the Travancore Nair Act (II of 1100 K); the Tranvancore Ezhava Act (III of 1100 K); the Travancore Nanjined Vellala Act (VI of 1101 K); the Travancore Kshatriya Act (VII of 1108 K ); the Travancore Krishnanaka Marumakkathayee Act (VII of 1115 K); the Cochin Marumaskkatham Act (XXXIII of 1113 K); or the Cochin Nair Act (XXIX of 1113 K) with respect to the matters for which provision is made in this Act, or

(b) who belong to any community, the members of which are largely domiciled in the State of Travancore-Cochin or Madras, as it existed immediately before the 1st November, 1956 and who, if this Act had not been passed, would have been governed with respect to the matters for which provision is made in this Act by any system of inheritance in which descent is traced through the female line; but does not include the aliyasanthana law."

Section 4 of the Hindu Succession Act has an overriding effect of the said Act and reads as follows:

"4. Overriding effect of Act: (1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act --

(a) any text, rule or interpretation of Hindu law or any custom or usage as part of that law in force immediately before the commencement of this Act shall cease to have effect with respect to any matter for which provision is made in this Act;

(b) any other law in force immediately before the commencement of this Act shall cease to apply to Hindus so far as it is inconsistent with any of the provisions contained in this Act."

Section 7 deals with devolution of interest in the property of a tarwed, tavazhi, kavaru or illom. It is necessary to extract Section 7(1) which reads as follows ;

"7. Devolution of interest in the property of a tarwed, tavazhi, kutumba, kavaru or illom:--

(1) When a Hindu, to whom the marumakkathayam or nambudiri law would have applied if this act had not been passed, dies after the commencement of this Act, having at the time of his or her death an interest in the property of a tarwad, tawazhi or illom, as the case may be, his or her interest in the property shall devolve by testamentary or intestate succession, as the case may be, under this Act and not according to the marumakkatayam or nambudiri law.

Secrtion 15 of the Hindu Succession Act deals with general rules of succession in the case of female Hindus, and it reads as follows :

"15. General rules of succession in the case of female Hindu dying intestate shall devolve according to the rules set out in Section 16 --

(a) firstly, upon the sons and daughters (including the children of any predeceased son or daughter) and the husband;

(b) secondly, upon the heirs of the husband;

(c) thirdly, upon the mother and father;

(d) fourthly, upon the heirs of the father;

(e) lastly, upon the heirs of the mother;

....."

Section 17 with which we are concerned now reads as follows.

"17. Special provisions respecting persons governed by marumakkathayam and aliyasantana laws. -- The provisions of Sections 8, 10, 15 and 23 shall have effect in relation to persons who would have been governed by the marumakkathayam law or aliyasantana law if this Act had not been passed as if --

(i) for Sub-clauses (c) and (d) of Section 8, the following had been substituted, namely:--

'(c) thirdly, if there is no heir of the two classes then upon his relatives, whether agnates or cognates'.

(ii) for Clauses (a) to (e) of Sub- Section (i) of Section 15, the following had been substituted, namely:--

(a) firstly, upon the sons and daughters (including the children of any pre-deceased son of daughter and the mother;

(b) secondly, upon the father and the husband;

(c) thirdly, upon the heirs of the mother;

(d) fourthly, upon the heirs of the father; and

(e) lastly, upon the heirs of the husband;

(iii) Clause (a) of Sub- Section (2) of Section 15 had been omitted.

(iv) Section 23 had been omitted."

So far as testamentary succession is concerned, the same is governed by Section 30 of the Hindu Succession Act, which reads as follows :

"30. Testamentary succession. -- Any Hindu may dispose of by will or other testamentary disposition any property, which is capable of being so disposed of by him in accordance with the provisions of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925), or any other law for the time being in force and applicable to Hindus.

Explanation. -- The interest of a male Hindu in a Mitakshara Coparcenary property or the interest of a member of a tarwad, tawazhi, Illom, Kutumba or kavaru in the property of the tarwad, tawazhi, illom, kutumba or kavaru shall notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, or in any other law for the time being in force, be deemed to be property capable of being disposed of by him or by her within the meaning of this Section ."