1. Late Sh.Harpal Singh Arora was the registered owner of property bearing municipal No.B-44, Vishal Enclave Rajouri Garden, New Delhi. He acquired ownership under a perpetual lease dated June 07, 1974 executed in his favour by the Municipal Corporation of Delhi. When he purchased the property on perpetual lease-hold basis, it consisted of only the ground floor. He constructed two floors above and sold them during his life time. He lived in the ground floor with his family comprising his wife Ms.Surinder Kaur and two sons named Raman Pal Singh and Gurpreet Singh and a daughter Sherry, who upon her marriage left the house.

2. Gurpreet Singh was married to Navneet Arora on May 15, 2001 and out of the wedlock a daughter was born to the couple on March 17, 2008. On a date not disclosed, Raman Pal Singh got married to Ms.Neetu. The family comprising Harpal Singh Arora, his wife Surinder Kaur, two sons Gurpreet Singh and Raman Pal Singh together with their wives resided together as one family, with one kitchen, on the ground floor of B-44, Vishal Enclave.

3. Harpal Singh died intestate on June 01, 2008 and was survived by his wife, two sons and daughter as the legal heirs. Each one inherited one forth share in the said property and other assets of the deceased Harpal Singh. On June 13, 2008 the three siblings executed a relinquishment deed in favour of their mother and thus in the official records Surinder Kaur became the owner of the property.

4. Tragedy struck the family when Gurpreet Singh died on May 20, 2012. Unfortunately, difference cropped between Surinder Kaur and her daughter-in-law Navneet Arora wife of Gurpreet Singh. Navneet Arora and her daughter were occupying one out of the three bed rooms on the ground floor. One room was occupied by Raman Pal Singh and Neetu Arora. The third by Surinder Kaur.

5. Surinder Kaur filed a suit for permanent and mandatory injunction against Navneet Arora, Raman Pal Singh and his wife Neetu Arora. It related to the ground floor.

6. As was to be expected, Raman Pal Singh and Neetu Arora, obviously collusively, informed the Court that they would move out of the room occupied by them, but we take on record the fact that the two continue to reside on the ground floor of the property.

7. Navneet Arora filed a written statement pointing out that she had filed a civil suit registered as number 203/2013 challenging the relinquishment deed executed by her husband in favour of Surinder Kaur which was pending before the Civil Judge, Tis Hazari Courts, Delhi. She pleaded that on the death of her husband his share would devolve upon her and her daughter and since the relinquishment deed was questioned by her, the suit filed by Surinder Kaur should await the decision in the suit filed by her. She claimed that she was living in her matrimonial house in her own right.

8. The learned Single Judge has held, vide impugned order dated March 21, 2014, that since Surinder Kaur was the owner of the property, it would not be a „shared household‟ of Navneet Arora in view of the law declared by the Supreme Court in the decision reported as (2007) 3 SCC 169 S.R.Batra & Anr. vs. Taruna Batra. The learned Single Judge has noted a few other decisions wherein it was held that an estranged daughter-in-law has no right to stay in the property owned by either her mother-in-law or her father-in-law. The learned Single Judge has held that at the old age of 60 Surinder Kaur would be entitled to a peaceful life.

9. The predecessor Division Bench before which the appeal came up for preliminary admission on April 30, 2014, having regard to the nature of the dispute, referred the parties to mediation. The mediation failed. The appeal was assigned to this Bench as per roster on August 14, 2014, and when it was brought to our notice that the parties are involved in multifarious litigation and two valuable assets being a shop at Jwala Heri market and a factory at Bahadurgarh, Haryana were lying locked, we had tried to effect a settlement between the parties and especially for the reason there is an outstanding loan in sum of approximately `2.36 crore for the house and `1.5 crore for the factory. The Bench had desired a solution where Navnit Arora could be provided a decent residential accommodation commensurate with her status in which she and her minor daughter could live and additionally some monthly made available to her for sustaining herself, and by way of reciprocity she could agree that the shop and the factory could be de-sealed, to be used by her brother-in-law Raman Pal Singh, but unfortunately so bitter are the relations between the parties that in spite of everybody realising that a status quo would damage each one of them, they refused to budge. Little realizing that if the Cholamandalam Investment and Finance Company Limited enforces its right in the residential house for which as of August 26, 2014 the overdue amount was `2.36 crores, the house itself would be lost and if for the factory at Bahadurgarh the financial institution to which it was mortgaged also enforces the mortgaged, even the factory would be lost. We had expected Surinder Kaur and her son Raman Pal Singh, who had also been accompanying her to the Court, to take the lead because they were in a dominant position, but it did not happen because the two wanted reciprocity from Navneet as if she was in an equal position.

10. Thus, we are constrained to decide the appeal on merits.

11. Pithily stated, the question arising for the consideration of this Court revolves around the interpretation of the term ‗shared household' as envisaged under Section 2(s) of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 and if the present case stands squarely covered by the authoritative pronouncement of the Supreme Court of India reported as (2007) 3 SCC 169 S.R Batra & Anr. v. Taruna Batra (Smt.).

12. Section 2(s) of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 reads as under:-

"2 (s) "shared household" means a household where the person aggrieved lives or at any stage has lived in a domestic relationship either singly or along with the respondent and includes such a household whether owned or tenanted either jointly by the aggrieved person and the respondent, or owned or tenanted by either of them in respect of which either the aggrieved person or the respondent or both jointly or singly have any right, title, interest or equity and includes such a household which may belong to the joint family of which the respondent is a member, irrespective of whether the respondent or the aggrieved person has any right, title or interest in the shared household."
13. Learned Counsel for Ms.Surinder Kaur had contended that in view of the decision of the Supreme Court in Taruna Batra‟s case (Supra), a daughter-in-law, as the present appellant before us, is precluded under the scheme of Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 to claim a ‗right of residence' in a premises exclusively owned by her mother-in-law even though she has admittedly resided therein with her husband and his family members in a domestic relationship. He would thus submit that the impugned order passed by the learned Single Judge suffers from no impropriety and is not liable to be interfered with in the present proceedings.

14. Since Ms.Surinder Kaur has planked her submissions on the decision of the Supreme Court in Taruna Batra‟s case (Supra) and we find that the conclusion expressed by the learned Single Judge in the impugned order is also essentially premised on the said decision, it would therefore be incumbent upon us to carefully examine the dictum in Taruna Batra‟s case (Supra) with a view to ascertain the factual conspectus and the issues which fell for consideration of the Supreme Court, in order to appreciate the observations contained in the said judgment.

15. A microscopic analysis of the said decision would reveal that Ms.Taruna Batra was married to the son of S.R.Batra and his wife on April 14, 2000. After the marriage the couple started residing together as husband and wife at second floor, B-135, Ashok Vihar, Phase-I, Delhi. It was not in dispute that the said property exclusively belonged to S.R.Batra's wife i.e. the mother-in-law of Taruna Batra. It would be pertinent to note that S.R.Batra and his wife resided separately on the ground floor of the said property. It was an admitted position that Ms.Taruna Batra had shifted to the residence of her parents owing to matrimonial acrimony with her husband. It was only much later that she sought to re-enter the suit property only to find a lock at the main entrance. In wake of such attending circumstances, she filed a suit seeking mandatory injunction to enable her to enter the house. It was the case of S.R.Batra and his wife before the Supreme Court and the Courts below that before any order came to be passed in the said suit, Ms.Taruna Batra along with her parents forcibly broke open the locks of the suit property. It was also contended by S.R.Batra and his wife that their son

- Amit Batra, the husband of Taruna Batra, had shifted to his own flat at Mohan Nagar, Ghaziabad before the litigation between the parties had ensued.

16. Perusal of the judgment further reveals that the learned Trial Judge vide order dated March 04, 2003, had held that Ms.Taruna Batra was in possession of the suit property and consequently granted temporary injunction in her favour. The said order of the learned Trial Judge was assailed in appeal before the learned Senior Civil Judge, Delhi, who vide order dated September 17, 2004 held that Ms.Taruna Batra was not residing in the second floor of the suit premises and also observed that her husband - Amit Batra was not living in the suit property, therefore, the matrimonial home could not be said to be a place where only the wife was residing. Laying a challenge to the order of the Appellate Court, Ms.Taurna Batra invoked the supervisory jurisdiction of this Court by filing a petition under Article 227 of Constitution of India. The learned Single Judge of this Court was pleased to hold that the second floor of the suit property was the matrimonial home of Ms.Taruna Batra and the fact that her husband shifted to Ghaziabad later would not make Ghaziabad the matrimonial home.

17. The Supreme Court after taking into consideration the factual matrix highlighted above, was pleased to observe in paragraph 21 of its judgment that this Court fell in error by interfering with the findings of the learned Senior Civil Judge who had categorically held that Ms.Taruna Batra was not residing in the suit premises. The Supreme Court was of the considered view that findings of fact rendered by Courts below could not be upset in exercise of jurisdiction under Article 226 and 227 of the Constitution.

18. We may notice that the provisions of Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 were not pressed into service or taken into consideration by the Courts below, for the simple reason that the said Act was not enacted at the relevant point of time. However, at the stage of arguments before the Supreme Court the said Act was in force and consequently the learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of Ms.Taruna Batra invited the attention of the Supreme Court to the provisions of the said Act, in order to contend that the definition of the ‗shared household' in terms of Section 2(s) of the said Act includes a household where the person aggrieved lives or at any stage had lived in a domestic relationship.

19. While repelling the said submission the Supreme Court observed in paragraph 26 of the judgment that if the aforesaid submission were to be accepted then it would mean that wherever the husband and wife lived together in the past that property would become a ‗share household' for the purpose of the Act. It was quite possible that the husband and wife may have lived together at dozens of places such as the house of relatives of the husband and all such places would qualify as ‗shared household', thus entitling the wife to reside in all such places. The Court held that such an interpretation would lead to chaos and absurdity.

20. It was further observed in paragraph 30 of the judgment that the definition of ‗shared household' in Section 2(s) of the Act was not happily worded and appeared to be a result of clumsy drafting which necessitated the Court to provide a sensible interpretation to avoid chaos in the society.

21. The learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of Ms.Taruna Batra also relied upon Section 19(1)(f) of the Act in order to contend that she should be given an alternative accommodation.

22. The Supreme Court negatived the said contention and observed that the claim for alternative accommodation could only be made against the husband and not against the in-laws or other relatives of the husband.

23. In paragraph 29 of the judgment the Supreme Court adverted their consideration to Section 17(1) of the Act and opined that the wife would only be entitled to claim a right of residence in a shared household and a ‗shared household' would only mean the house belonging to or taken on rent by the husband, or the house which belongs to ‗the joint family‟ of which the husband is a member. The Court proceeded to observe that the property in question neither belonged to the husband nor was it taken on rent by him and neither was the said property a joint family property of which the husband was a member. The said property was exclusively owned by the mother-in-law of Ms.Taruna Batra and thus could not be treated as a ‗shared household'.

24. Before we embark on the journey of culling-out the ratio of the above- noted decision, it would be instructive to take into consideration the luminous observations expressed by Earl of Halsbury L.C. in the celebrated pronouncement of the House of Lords in the decision reported as [1901] A.C. 495 Quinn v. Leathem -.

―Now, before discussing the case of Allen v. Flood - [1898] A.C. 1 and what decided therein, there are two observation of a general character which I wish to make, and one is to repeat what I have very often said before, that every judgment must be read as applicable to the particular facts proved, or assumed to be proved, since the generality of the expression which may be found there are not intended to be expositions of the whole law, but governed and qualified by the particular facts of the case in which such expressions are to be found. The other is that a case is only an authority for what it actually decides. I entirely deny that it can be quoted for a proposition that may seem to follow logically from it. Such a mode of reasoning assumes that the law is necessarily a logical code, whereas every lawyer must acknowledge that the law is not always logical at all.‖

25. The said observations have been cited with approval since time immemorial by the Supreme Court. In the decision reported as (2007) 10 SCC 82 Sumtibai & Ors. v. Paras Finance Co. & Ors., the Supreme Court observed:

"10.As observed by this Court in State of Orissa v. Sudhansu Sekhar Misra - (1970) ILLJ 662 SC vide para 13:
A decision is only an authority for what it actually decides. What is of the essence in a decision is its ratio and not every observation found therein nor what logically follows from the various observations made in it. On this topic this is what Earl of Halsbury, LC said in Quinn v. Leathem, 1901 AC 495:
Now before discussing the case of Allen v. Flood (1898) AC 1 and what was decided therein, there are two observations of a general character which I wish to make, and one is to repeat what I have very often said before, that every judgment must be read as applicable to the particular facts proved, or assumed to be proved, since the generality of the expressions which may be found there are not intended to be expositions of the whole law, but governed and qualified by the particular facts of the case in which such expressions are to be found. The other is that a case is only an authority for what it actually decides. I entirely deny that it can be quoted for a proposition that may seem to follow logically from it. Such a mode of reasoning assumes that the law is necessarily a logical Code, whereas every lawyer must acknowledge that the law is not always logical at all.
11. In Ambica Quarry Works v. State of Gujarat and Ors.(1987) 1 SCC 213 (vide para 18) this Court observed: The ratio of any decision must be understood in the background of the facts of that case. It has been said long time ago that a case is only an authority for what it actually decides, and not what logically follows from it.
12. In Bhavnagar University v. Palitana Sugar Mills Pvt. Ltd - (2003) 2 SC 111 (vide para 59), this Court observed:
It is well settled that a little difference in facts or additional facts may make a lot of difference in the precedential value of a decision.
13. As held in Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd. and Anr. v. N.R.Vairamani and Anr.- AIR 2004 SC 4778, a decision cannot be relied on without disclosing the factual situation. In the same Judgment this Court also observed:
Court should not place reliance on decisions without discussing as to how the factual situation fits in with the fact situation of the decision on which reliance is placed. Observations of Courts are neither to be read as Euclids theorems nor as provisions of the statute and that too taken out of the context. These observations must be read in the context in which they appear to have been stated. Judgments of Courts are not to be construed as statutes. To interpret words, phrases and provisions of a statute, it may become necessary for judges to embark into lengthy discussions but the discussion is meant to explain and not to define. Judges interpret statutes, they do not interpret judgments. They interpret words of statutes; their words are not to be interpreted as statutes.
In London Graving Dock Co. Ltd. v. Horton - 1951 AC 737 Lord Mac Dermot observed:
The matter cannot, of course, be settled merely by treating the ipsissima ventral of Willes, J. as though they were part of an Act of Parliament and applying the rules of interpretation appropriate thereto. This is not to detract from the great weight to be given to the language actually used by that most distinguished judge.
In Home Office v. Dorset Yacht Co. -1970 (2) AER 294 Lord Reid said, Lord Atkin`s speech...is not to be treated as if it was a statute definition it will require qualification in new circumstances. Megarry, J. in (1971) 1 WLR 1062 observed: One must not, of course, construe even a reserved judgment of Russell L. J. as if it were an Act of Parliament. And, in Herrington v. British Railways Board -1972 (2) WLR 537Lord Morris said:
There is always peril in treating the words of a speech or judgment as though they are words in a legislative enactment, and it is to be remembered that judicial utterances are made in the setting of the facts of a particular case.
Circumstantial flexibility, one additional or different fact may make a world of difference between conclusions in two cases. Disposal of cases by blindly placing reliance on a decision is not proper.
The following words of Lord Denning in the matter of applying precedents have become locus classicus:
Each case depends on its own facts and a close similarity between one case and another is not enough because even a single significant detail may alter the entire aspect, in deciding such cases, one should avoid the temptation to decide cases (as said by Cardozo, J. ) by matching the colour of one case against the colour of another. To decide therefore, on which side of the line a case falls, the broad resemblance to another case is not at all decisive.
*** Precedent should be followed only so far as it marks the path of justice, but you must cut the dead wood and trim off the side branches else you will find yourself lost in thickets and branches. My plea is to keep the path of justice clear of obstructions which could impede it."
26. The said observations are indeed a lodestar and valuably guide us to appreciate the observations of the Supreme Court in Taruna Batra‟s case (Supra) in the correct perspective.

27. As highlighted earlier, while deciding Taruna Batra's case (Supra) the Supreme Court took into consideration the fact that after the marriage Ms.Taruna Batra and her husband - Amit Batra started living at the second floor of the suit premises, whereas the in-laws resided separately on the ground floor of the suit property. In view of the said state of affairs, it is palpably evident that Ms.Taruna Batra and her husband were not living together with Ms.Taruna Batra's in-laws, as members of ‗joint family' in the legal-sense and the second floor of the suit-property would not qualify as the ‗shared household' in terms of Section 2(s) of the Act. The fact that the husband and wife resided on a separate floor altogether is indicative of the fact that they were not living as a ‗joint family' with the in-laws of Ms.Taruna Batra.

28. It is a settled proposition that to constitute a ‗joint family' the members thereof must not only reside together but partake meals prepared from a common kitchen, whereas it appears from the perusal of the judgment rendered in Taruna Batra's case (Supra) that there was nothing to indicate that the kitchen was common.

29. The term ‗Joint Family' has not been defined under the Act. We find that the General Clauses Act, 1897 is also conspicuously silent in this regard. Therefore, this Court must traverse beyond to ascertain the true meaning and import of the term ‗Joint Family'.

30. It has been pertinently observed in the decision reported as (1914) 1KB 641 Camden (Marquis) v. IRC:-

―It is for the court to interpret the statute as best it can. In so doing the court may no doubt assist itself in the discharge of its duty by any literary help which it can find, including of course the consultation of standard authors and references to well known and authoritative dictionaries.‖
31. The Supreme Court has observed in the decision reported as 1985 Supp SCC 280 State of Orissa v. Titaghur Paper Mills Co. Ltd. that the court may take the aid of dictionaries to ascertain the meaning of a word in common parlance, where the word has not been statutorily defined or judicially interpreted.

32. The Supreme Court in its decision reported as (2004) 1 SCC 256 S. Samuel v. Union of India, held that when a word is not defined in the Act itself, it is permissible to refer to dictionaries to find out the general sense in which that word is understood in the common parlance. The Court sounded a note of caution that in selecting one out of the various meanings of a word, regard must always be had to the context, as it is a fundamental rule that the meaning as words and expressions used in an Act must take their colour from the context in which they appear.

33. Advanced Law Lexicon Dictionary, P. Ramanatha Aiyar, Third Edition, Wadhwa-Nagpur defines ‗Joint-Family' in the following terms:-

―Joint Family: "Joint Family" means a family of which the members live together, have a common mess and are descendants from a common ancestor and shall include wives or husbands, as the case may be, of its member, but shall exclude married daughters and their children. [Manipur Municipalities Act (43 of 1994), S. 2(27)]...‖[Emphasis Supplied]
34. Iravati Karve opines that a ‗Joint Family' is a group of people who generally live under one roof, who eat food cooked at one hearth, who hold property in common, who participate in common worship and are related to each other as some particular type of kindred. [‗Kinship Organisation in India', Asia Publishing House, Mumbai, 1968]

35. We may also note that the Act secures „right of residence‟ for an ‗aggrieved person' in a „shared household‟ which may belong to the „joint family‟ of which „respondent‟ is a member, irrespective of whether the „respondent‟ or the „aggrieved person‟ has any right, title or interest in the „shared household‟.

36. The term ‗Household' is defined by Wharton's Law Lexicon, Fifteenth Edition, Universal Law Publishers in the following terms;-

―...Means the member of a family related to each other by blood, marriage or adoption and normally residing together and sharing meal or holding a common ration card. [National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005, S. 2(f)]‖
37. This Court in its decision reported as 80 (1999) DLT 611 Hari Sharma v. Amarjit Singh Ramana whilst arriving at the conclusion that the husband and wife were living together as a family and the relations between them were cordial, ascribed importance to the fact that they were sharing a common kitchen.

38. It thus bears no reiteration that in Taruna Batra's case (Supra), Ms.Taruna Batra and her husband - Amit Batra were not residing with the Appellants as members of ‗joint family' in a ‗shared household' as understood in the legalistic sense, the residence and kitchen being separate.

39. Thus,Ms.Taruna Batra could not derive any benefit from the provisions of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 as she or her husband, either singly or jointly, had no right, title, interest or equity in the second floor of the suit property and neither was the couple residing as members of ‗Joint Family' with her in-laws and her mother-in- law was the exclusive owner of the suit property.

40. In paragraph 29 of the judgment the Court pertinently observed:-

―29. ...The property in question in the present case neither belongs to Amit Batra nor was it taken on rent by him nor is it a joint family property of which the husband Amit Batra is a member. It is the exclusive property of Appellant 2, mother of Amit Batra. Hence it cannot be called a "shared household". ‖ [Emphasis Supplied]
41. The submission of the learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the Ms.Taruna Batra, as noted in paragraph 24 of the judgment, that merely because Ms.Taruna Batra had lived in the property in question in the past, it fell within the ambit of ‗shared household' was rejected by the Supreme Court, which was of the considered opinion that such a view would lead to chaos in the society since the wife may insist on claiming ‗right of residence' in virtually any property in which she may have resided together with her husband in the past.

42. Furthermore, the Supreme Court also observed that in view of the admitted fact that Ms.Taruna Batra had shifted to the residence of her parents owing to matrimonial disputes with her husband and was thus no longer in possession of the said portion of suit property, the question of protecting her possession could not arise. The very foundation of her claim for injunction restraining the in-laws from dispossessing her was thus wholly misconceived.

43. In light of the foregoing discussion, we are of the view that Taruna Batra's case (Supra) is only an authority for the proposition that a wife is precluded under the law from claiming ‗right of residence' in a premises, owned by the relatives of the husband, wherein she has lived with her husband separately, but not as a member of the ‗joint family' along with the relatives of the husband who own the premises.

44. However, in the later eventuality, if a couple live as members of ‗joint family' in a domestic relationship with the relatives of the husband in a premises owned by such relatives of the husband, statutory prescription would indeed enable the wife to claim ‗right of residence' since it would fall within the realm of ‗shared household' as contemplated under Section 2(s) of the Act irrespective of whether she or her husband has any right, title or interest in the „shared household‟.

45. We may notice that Section 19(1)(a) of the Act clears the cloud, if any, as it mandates in unequivocal terms that a Magistrate disposing an application under sub-Section (1) of Section 12, may, on being satisfied that domestic violence has taken place, pass a residence order restraining the respondent from dispossessing or in any other manner disturbing the possession of the aggrieved person from the ‗shared household', whether or not the respondent has a legal or equitable interest in the „shared household‟.

46. It is a settled tenet of construction of statutes that a statute must be read as a whole and not in a truncated manner.

47. It would be apposite to reproduce the observations comprised in 'Maxwell on the Interpretation of Statutes' by P. St. J. Langan, Twelfth Edition, 1976, N.M. Tripathi Private Ltd., at Pg. 47:-

"It was resolved in the case of Lincoln College- (1595) 3 Co. Rep. 58b that the good expositor of an Act of Parliament should "make construction on all the parts together, and not of one part only of itself." Lord Davey in Canada Sugar Refining Co. Ltd. v. R- [1898] A.C. 735 observed that "every clause of a statute is to be construed with reference to the context and other clauses of the Act, so as, as far as possible, to make a consistent enactment of the whole statute."..."
[Emphasis Supplied]
48. The Supreme Court in its decision reported as AIR 1963 SC 1241 State of W.B. v. Union of India, held that the Court must ascertain the intention of the legislature by directing its attention not merely to the clauses to be construed but to the entire statute; it must compare the clause with the other parts of the law, and the setting in which the clause to be interpreted occurs.
49. We are of the view that the plain language of the Act. viz. Section 2(s) read in conjunction with Section 19 (1)(a) is unambiguous and enables an aggrieved person to claim ‗right of residence' in a household even though the aggrieved person or the respondent may have no right, title or interest in the said household, if the aggrieved person and the respondent have lived therein by establishing a domestic relationship with the joint family of which the respondent is a member and to which such household belongs.

50. We may profitably refer to the authoritative treatise on statutory interpretation, 'Craies on Statute Law' by S.G.G. Edgar, Seventh Edition, First Indian Reprint, Universal Law Publishing Co., Pg. 65, wherein the author has taken note of a long line of English decisions on the subject commencing from (1832) 2 D. & Cl. (H.L.) 480 Warburton v. Loveland; (1864) 2 H. & C. 431 Att.- Gen. v. Sillem; (1881) 8 Q.B.D. 125 Att.- Gen. V. Noyes; (1889) 24 Q.B.D. 1 Hornsey L.B. v. Monarch Investment Building Society; [1891] A.C. 401 M'Cowan v. Baine; [1897] A.C. 22 Salomon v. Salomon; [1922] 1 A.C. 1 Sutters v. Briggs; [1959] 1 W.L.R. 995 I.R.C. v.

Collco Dealings, Same v. Lucbor Dealings; [1954] 1 Q.B. 439 (D.C.), Cf. Gluchowska v. Tottenham Borough Council wherein it has been held that where the language of an Act is clear and explicit, effect must be given to it, whatever may be the consequences, for in that case the words of the statute speak the intention of the legislature.

51. Further at Page 91, it has been pertinently observed:-

"...In Abel v. Lee reported as (1871) L.R. 6 C.P. 365, it was observed by Willes J. that no doubt the general rule is that the language of an Act is to be read according to 