enant has created nuisance), 12(1)(f) (for bona fide requirement of landlord for non-residential purposes) and 12(1)(g) (bona fide requirements of landlord to carry out repairs) of the M.P. Accommodation Control Act, 1961. The relevant parts of section 12 of the Act are set out as under: "12. Restriction on eviction of tenants.-- (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other law or contract, no suit shall be filed in any civil court against a tenant for his eviction from any accommodation except on one or more of the following grounds, only, namely-- 3 (a) - (b) x x x (c) that the tenant or any person residing with him has created a nuisance or has done any act which is inconsistent with the purpose for which he was admitted to the tenancy of the accommodation, or which is likely to affect adversely and substantially the interest of the landlord therein: (d) - (e) x x x (f) that the accommodation let for non-residential purpose is required bona fide by the landlord for the purpose of continuing or starting his business or that of any of his major sons or unmarried daughters if he is the owner thereof or for any person for whose benefit the accommodation is held and that the landlord or such person has no other reasonably suitable non-

.. 25 .. NMS166.13.sxw residential accommodation of his own in his occupation in the city or town concerned; (g) that the accommodation has become unsafe, or unfit for human habitation and is required bona fide by the landlord for carrying out repairs which cannot be carried out without the accommodation being vacated."

5. In the written statement filed in the trial court, the respondents herein raised the main objection that the appellants herein are not the owners of the suit property and the trial court had no jurisdiction to adjudicate the matter as the suit property has been a Wakf property. It may be pertinent to mention that in the written statement the respondents nowhere took the plea that the suit property, namely `Madras Hotel' is a joint family property. The trial court held that the appellants were in bona fide need of carrying on the business of sweets and for running a restaurant. No other vacant property was in possession of the appellants in Jabalpur. It was also held that the shop in question is very old, unsafe and in dilapidated condition. There is need to repair and carry out some structural changes in the shop which cannot be carried out unless the same is made available to the appellants. The trial court clearly held that the appellants are in bona fide need of the suit property. The trial court also held that the respondents have not paid rent since September, 1992 and decided the issue of default in favour of the appellants. The trial court categorically held that the suit property is not the Wakf property and decreed the suit of the appellants.

8. The High Court in the impugned judgment, without any pleadings or basis, held that the property namely `Madras Hotel' is a joint family property. The High Court erroneously observed that the property namely `Madras Hotel' was purchased by the father of the appellants and his brothers, whereas in fact the property was purchased by the appellants vide sale deed dated 31.12.1991. The assumption of wrong fact has led to total erroneous finding and conclusion. The High Court in para 8 observed as under: "......It is firmly established that the building known as `Madras Hotel' belongs to Laxminarayan Pal and his two sons who are the plaintiffs. That is their joint family property. This building was purchased by Laxminarayan when he was carrying on business with his two brothers and the partition took place long after the acquisition of that building. In that partition that building was allotted to Laxminarayan .. 26 .. NMS166.13.sxw alone......"

12. The appellants further relied on Mudi Gowda Gowdappa Sankh v. Ram Chandra Ravagowda Sankh (1969) 1 SCC 386 wherein this Court held that, of course, there is no presumption that merely because the family is joint so the property is also joint. So the person alleging the property to be joint family property must prove it.

In that case, this Court further held that the burden of proving that any particular property is joint family property is, therefore, in the first instance, upon the person who claims it to be coparcenary property. But if the possession of a nucleus of the joint family property is either admitted or proved, any acquisition made by a member of the joint family is presumed to be joint family property. The Court carved out an exception and observed that, "this is, however, subject to the limitation that the joint family property must be such as with its aid the property in question could have been acquired. It is only after the possession of an adequate nucleus is shown, that the onus shifts on to the person who claims the property as self- acquisition to affirmatively make out that the property was acquired without any aid from the family estate." In Mudi Gowda Gowdappa Sankh (supra), this court heavily relied upon the ratio of Privy Council judgment in Randhi Appalaswami v. Randhi Suryanarayanamurti & Others ILR 1948 Mad 440 wherein the legal position of Hindu Law has been beautifully articulated by Sir John Beaumont. The relevant portion of the judgment is reproduced as under: "Proof of the existence of a joint family does not lead to the presumption that property held by any member of the family is joint, and the burden rests upon anyone asserting that any item of property was joint to establish the fact. But where it is established that the family possessed some joint property which from its nature and relative value may have formed the nucleus from which the property in question may have been acquired, the burden shifts to the party alleging self-acquisition to establish affirmatively that the property was acquired without the aid of the joint family property."

SUBMISSION OF MR P. K. DHAKEPHALKAR, LEARNED SENIOR COUNSEL FOR DEFENDANT NO.3 .. 27 .. NMS166.13.sxw

6. Mr Dhakephalkar, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of defendant No.3 one of the brother of the plaintiff supported the case of the plaintiff and submits that the presumption of joint family business exists.

Learned senior counsel submits that there is no proof of separation of the family and/or business. Various firms and companies were formed by family members for various reasons. Forming of various firms and companies for the purpose of carrying on business does mot mean that there was separation of family members. Mr Dhakephalkar also placed reliance on para 5 of the Affidavit in reply filed by defendant No.1 in support of his submission that defendant No.1 had admitted in the said para that out of the income generated from M/s Kanayalal Rameshkumar, the first defendant started other businesses. Mr Dhakephalkar placed reliance on the Judgment of this Court in case of Kausabai wd/o Rajaram Waradkar & Ors. Vs. Gayabai wd/o Gundaji Mogre & ors. Reported in (2010) (4) Mh.L.J. 46 in support of his submission that a distinction has to be made between joint family property and the property acquired by joint efforts. Even if one of the coparceners decides to break away from the rest of the family other coparceners still can constitute a joint Hindu family. Learned senior counsel also submits that if the business was joint and the property was acquired from earnings of joint business, it must be presumed that each of the members has .. 28 .. NMS166.13.sxw his equal share unless otherwise shown. Learned senior counsel submits that defendants have failed to show that any of the properties which are subject matter of this suit, were self-acquired property. Paras 8 to 10 of the said Judgment read thus :

"8. Thus, they contend that they constitute a joint Hindu family. In fact, law presumes that every Hindu family is a joint family unless otherwise shown. In the instant case, however, the controversy seems to have arisen because the father does not live with the family. Normally, a joint family consists of father, mother and sons and their wives. Here, admittedly, father had long back turned the plaintiffs and defendant No.2 out of the house and he is living separately. The question is whether the mother and two sons could constitute a joint family and that seems to be the question of law raised. I see no reason why they cannot. If two brothers, upon death of father, can constitute a joint family, there is no reason why two brothers in this case with their mother cannot constitute a joint family, when father deserts them. Even if one of the coparceners decides to break away from the rest of the family, the other coparceners can constitute a joint family. Even otherwise, in the instant case father had deserted them, he has not separated as such from the family. I find that the two sons with their mother and even wives can constitute the joint Hindu family. In the instant case, it could be said that the plaintiffs and defendant no.2 constituted a joint Hindu family.
9. The plaintiffs' case is that plaintiffs and defendant no.2 were turned out of the house. If the pleadings in the plaint are seen,it could be gathered that the plaintiffs do not plead that family possesses any ancestral property at all. It is not even their case that the father had given anything to them from any ancestral property. There is, therefore, no pleading of the plaintiff's that any kind of nucleus was available for blending the suit property, in order that any property possessed or owned by the should become the joint family property.
                 There     has   to   be   some   nucleus   available   from   which   that  





                                      .. 29 ..                             NMS166.13.sxw


property could be purchased. Since in this case the plaintiffs did not possess any ancestral income giving property, it could not be said that the suit house was a joint family property as such.
10.The distinction has to be made between joint family property and the property acquired by joint efforts. The suit property could in no case be treated as joint family property. It is to be seen if it is a jointly acquired property or not. Defendants contend that defendant no.2 was alone running his own business, while plaintiff claims that the business run was family business and from its income the property is acquired.
From the evidence on record, the suit property could certainly be said to be the jointly acquired property. It is the case of the plaintiffs that plaintiff no.1 started the business and started earning. DW 1 Vitthal admits in the cross examination that his mother was dealing in grains and was earning. He also admits that his mother and aunt paid him money for starting business. If mother was also doing the business, as is accepted by the defendants, it is difficult to accept the theory of defendant no.2 that he was alone running the shop. Admittedly, there were two shops at two different places. It is therefore, difficult to accept that defendant No.2 alone could run both the shops at the two different places. The theory of the plaintiffs that the shops were joint and run by all has, therefore, to be accepted. There is another strong reason why the property has to be teated as joint ly acquired property. Defendant No.1 had filed the suit against defendant No.2 and plaintiff No.1 in respect of recovery of rent of shop of plaintiffs and defendant No.2. The certified copy of the plaint in that suit is Exh.36. In plaint para No.2, following averments are made.
" Defendant No.2 is the mother of defendant No.1 and they constitute joint family. Defendants carry on retail grocery business.".
These contents are admitted in the written statement filed at Exh.37. Obviously, defendant No.2 admitted in that suit that the shop was a joint family business. Even in para 17 of the said written statement there is a clear averment that defendants were running the shop and house was reconstructed by the defendants. DW 1 Vitthal in cross-examination admits that he had filed such a written .. 30 .. NMS166.13.sxw statement and that he had stated therein that house belonged to joint family. With this evidence, I do no think that any more evidence is required to conclude that the business was joint and the property was purchased from that business income. If the business was joint and the property is acquired from earning of joint business, it must be assumed that each of the members has an equal share in it unless otherwise shown.
This takes me to the next substantial question of law i.e. Whether the appellant could be treated as a bona fide purchaser. Bona fide purchaser is that person who takes reasonable care to ascertain that the transferor had the power to make transfer and he had acted in good faith and also that the true owner had consented to such transfer. Since true owners are challenging the transfer, there is no question of consent. Let us see if there is evidence of appellant's acting in good faith and whether he had taken reasonable care. I find that this is a fit case of lack of good faith and not even a reasonable case has been taken. It appears, on the other hand, that defendant no.1 entered into contract of purchase of the property with open eyes. The reason for saying so is that the appellant does not enter into witness box to make out the case in pleasing and second in his own plaint vide Exh.36, he had made an averment and assertion that the shop and the property belonged to the joint family. This clearly shows that defendant no.1 has had full knowledge of the property being owned by the family and not by defendant no.2 alone. The appellant therefore, could not be treated to be a bonafide purchaser. Although I find that the property is not a joint family property as such, all the same it is jointly acquired property in which each one of them has equal share. In the circumstances, there is no difficulty in confirming the judgment and decree as passed by the court below. The appeal is, therefore, dismissed. No order as to costs."
7. Mr. Dhakephalkar, learned senior counsel also placed reliance upon Supreme Court Judgment in case of Madanlal (dead) by LRS. And Ors. v. Yoga Bai (dead) by LRS. reported in 2003(5) Supreme Court Cases 59 in support of his submission that running of various separate firms and .. 31 .. NMS166.13.sxw companies would not necessarily imply separation. Paras 5 & 6 of the said Judgment read thus :

"5. The High Court has not believed the case of the defendants that there had already been a settlement in respect of the properties in question in 1942. It at least indicates that even according to the contesting defendants, some settlement of the property amongst the members of the family was necessary which had already taken place earlier i.e. to say existence of joint property cannot be denied. Once their case of settlement in respect of the same property having taken place earlier has been dis-believed, there remain hardly any ground to resist the claim of the plaintiff for partition and 1/5th share in the properties. The case of the defendant that after the settlement the brothers have been residing separately and they have been carrying on their business separately, hence there remained nothing which was joint amongst the members of the family which could be partitioned is rightly held to be untenable.
6. We find that after appreciation of the evidence the High Court has arrived at a finding that no such settlement had taken place in 1942. Learned counsel for the appellant has vehemently urged that Exhibit B-3 is the deed of settlement which should have been given due weight by the High Court while considering the evidence. He has also submitted that the High Court has not taken into account documentary evidence placed on record, namely Exhibits B-2, B-3, B-4, B-5, B-6 etc. as well as Ex.B-15 and B-16. He has also placed reliance upon the decision in Surinder Singh v. Hardial Singh and Ors. MANU/SC/0166/1984 : [1985]1SCR1059 to the effect that findings of fact recorded, ignoring the documentary evidence on record is vitiated. We find that the High Court has considered a number of documents on record except a few which may not have been considered necessary to be referred to in the judgment. The High Court has taken a note of Ex.B-3, the alleged deed of settlement executed by Purandas in 1957 and has dealt with it in detail. Referring to the statement of DW-1, the High Court has taken a note of the fact that according to him B-3 came into existence since the Government was demanding inspection of their account books. DW-1 also could not indicate the order of handing over the shop to him by Purandas prior to 1972. The settlement was said to be in .. 32 .. NMS166.13.sxw 1942 and deed is executed in 1957. Taking the evidence on record as a whole the case of the defendant of settlement of properties in 1942 and the deed executed in 1957 have not been believed. We find no good reason to interfere with that finding of fact which is supported by evidence and cogent reasons. In so far the other documents, which according to the appellant have not been considered, they are some partnership deeds which have been entered into between different members of the family in different combinations. It is sought to be established that they have been running their business separately under different partnership. We feel that no such inference can be drawn. In a family which carries on a number of business, it is quite often that it is carried out under different names and styles and often constitutes different companies or partnerships for better handling of business or to keep it manageable or for various other reasons. It is no proof of separation nor are the letters which are sought to be relied upon, written to the income-tax authorities and the assessment orders passed by the income-tax authorities. It has already come in evidence that even B-3 came into existence since the government wanted to inspect the account books. Therefore, once the settlement before the suit for partition was filed is not accepted by means of a finding of fact recorded by the High Court, the case of the defendant falls through."
8. Mr Dhakephalkar, learned senior counsel submits that the third defendant is also entitled to 1/10 th share in the properties and business described in Exhibit-D & C, defendant No.3 being a member of the joint family.

9. Defendant No.6 has filed separate affidavit supporting the case of the plaintiff and adopts the arguments advanced by the plaintiff and defendant No.3.

.. 33 .. NMS166.13.sxw SUBMISSION OF MR ASPI CHINOY, LEARNED SENIOR COUNSEL ON BEHALF OF DEFENDANT NO.1 :

10. Mr Chinoy, learned senior counsel submitted that defendant No.1 at the age of 17 started business as a broker in spices and earned profits. It is submitted that in the year 1969, firm of M/s Moolchand and Co. in which father was partner, had stopped business as it had suffered large losses.

Father had liabilities of Rs.25 lacs and did not carry on any other business. In 1969, the firm M/s Kanayalal Rameshkumar was started in partnership with M/s Kanayalal Lokram and others. Defendant No.1 introduced in the said firm the amounts he had earned from his brokerage business. Defendant No.1 was the eldest and the only earning member also introduced/admitted the plaintiff and defendant Nos.2 to 4 who were then minors to the benefits of the partnership. Father of the plaintiff and defendant Nos.1 to 8 along with other two partners of M/s Mulchand & Co. filed a petition in 1973 for declaring father and few others as insolvent in this Court. Mr Chinoy, learned senior counsel invited my attention to the statement of father recorded in the said insolvency proceedings. Father admitted in his statement that he had liability of Rs.25,80,000/- to 17 creditors. It was also admitted that since 1969 he had not carried on any other business and had not invested any money with any firm or relations and did not have any .. 34 .. NMS166.13.sxw private investments. He also admitted that he had not entered into any contract under which he had to receive any benefit. By an order dated 9 th October 1973, this Court declared father of the plaintiff and defendant Nos.1 to 8 as 'insolvent'. It is submitted that for purchase of flat in Jolly Maker Apartmentr in 1976, defendant Nos.1 to 4 had pulled their own funds which flat was sold in 1982 and four separate flats at Andheri were purchased by defendant Nos.1 to 4 out of the sale proceeds of flat in Jolly Maker Apartment. Mr Chinoy submits that in 1982 defendant No.1 formed his sole property concern viz. Gautam Overseas for trading in dry-fruits and spices. Since 1985, defendant Nos.2,3 and 4 exited and the plaintiff has in effect been running the partnership firm of M/s Rameshkumar Gopaldas and the profits and funds have been distributed on between the plaintiff and defendant No.1 and nobody else. Defendant No.2 started his own independent business in the year 1985. Defendant Nos.3 and 4 started business in the name and style of Bhagwandas & Sons in 1985. Plaintiff purchased a flat at Versova Woodlands in the year 1985 out of his own funds.

Defendant No.1 started his first construction venture M/s United Development Agency with outside partners in 1985. Plaintiff started doing business as a sole proprietor of M/s Ahuja Traders which carried on the business of trading in dry fruits and spices in 1986. Defendant No.1 entered .. 35 .. NMS166.13.sxw into partnership with certain outsiders in the firm viz. CAMS constructions in the year 1988 and carried on the business of construction contractors. In 1989, first defendant entered into partnership firm with certain non-family members in the name and style of CAMs Developers and carried on the business of construction contractors. In 1989, the first defendant entered into partnership with eight other partners in the name and style of CAMS India Corporation which included the plaintiff and certain non family member. Mr Chinoy submits that as far as mortgage of flat No.601-B standing in the name of plaintiff is concerned, the said flat was given as security in favour of State Bank of India for securing the loan given to CAMS Developers. At the request of the first defendant, plaintiff being a partner of CAMS India Corporation, plaintiff mortgaged his flat. It is submitted that in 1990, plaintiff started carrying on construction business in the name and style of Mahavir Constructions with certain outsiders and non family members. In 1991 defendant No.1 and plaintiff started partnership business in the name and style of Ahuja Constructions.

11. During the period between 1991 to 2003, the plaintiff and his wife have been partners and shareholder in diverse partnership firms and companies set up by first defendant to undertake business initially as construction contractors and later as developers. Plaintiff and his wife hold .. 36 .. NMS166.13.sxw shares in different companies. Mr Chinoy submits that other family members i.e. defendant Nos.2 to 8 were not involved in any of these firms and companies and had never made any claims to the business, assets, profits or funds thereof. The profits and assets of any of the firm or company were never shared with or distributed to defendant Nos.2 to 8. Plaintiff and his wife were given shares details whereof are forming part of record in various companies in this proceedings. Mr Chinoy submits that in the year 2001, the real estate market had collapsed and contracting jobs had come to a standstill. The partnership firms of the businesses of the first defendant had accumulated losses of Rs.35 crores. Plaintiff wanted to exit from the business and wanted to ensure that he would not be exposed to such large liabilities and that the assets he had offered as security for such firms/businesses were released. Accordingly during the period 2001-2003, the first defendant proceeded to convert the said partnership firms into private limited companies under Part IX of the Companies Act and the erstwhile partners were allotted shares in the new companies in proportion to their capital ratios in the firms resulting in the liability of the plaintiff and the other partners becoming restricted to their shareholding. The said companies thereafter raised capital by increasing their shareholding. The plaintiff did not subscribe to such additional shares. Plaintiff was fully aware of such .. 37 .. NMS166.13.sxw additional shares being offered/issued and did not invest additional amounts in purchasing the shares. Mr Chinoy submits that to finance the project defendant No.16 Company gave 49% equity to Citi Properties (a Division of Citi Bank) for Rs.198 Crs and took a loan of Rs.225 Crs. It is stated that Rs.195 Crs had been disbursed from ICICI Bank. Presently there are liabilities of Rs.635 Crs in respect of the said project. There are borrowings of Rs.270 Crs in other projects and losses of Rs.135 Crs in defendant No.17 Company.

Mr Chinoy submits that for the first time by letter dated 28 th January 2008, plaintiff through Advocate sought inspection of various documents and registers of defendant No.17 Company. Since loan taken by Keepsade Private Limited from Cosmos Bank was repaid, flat of the plaintiff on the 12 th floor at Soona Villa was released in the month of November 2011.

12. Mr Chinoy, learned senior counsel submits that merely because two brothers were partners in various businesses would not mean that it would be a family business. No other members participated in the business.

There was no family contribution in any of the businesses which are claimed as joint family business. Since 1970, parties were not residing together and were separate. Since 1984, apart from plaintiff, no other family members have been participating in Kirana shop or construction firm. There is no plea of the plaintiff that since 1984, any distribution of the property in any of the .. 38 .. NMS166.13.sxw business had taken place amongst the family members. There is also no plea of the plaintiff that any other family members other than partners in such business were given any share and/or demanded by such family member. It is submitted that there is neither joint family nor any joint participation or issuing of profit or liability between the plaintiff and defendant Nos.1 to 8.

Mr Chinoy submits that since father had no income of any nature whatsoever and had no investments and had not started any business as admitted by father himself in his statement recorded in insolvency proceedings since 1969 and had suffered a huge loss, there was no question of the father investing any amount or starting any business in the name of family members in the year 1969 or thereafter. It is submitted that the plaintiff has failed to prove any nucleus. Defendant Nos.1 to 4 had purchased flats from the funds out of profit distributed to each partner. Plaintiff also had purchased a flat at Versova out of his own funds. Except defendant Nos.2 and 6, other family members have filed affidavit admitting that there was no joint family business as claimed by the plaintiff. Mr Chinoy invited my attention to affidavit in reply of defendant No.1 in which it was pleaded that the shares were issued in various companies in which plaintiff had shares at material times and was offered such shares but plaintiff chose not to invest any further amounts in the said companies. Mr Chinoy also invited my attention to re-joinder filed .. 39 .. NMS166.13.sxw by the plaintiff to the reply dated 5 th July 2013 to demonstrate that the said averment made in the affidavit and in particular para 17 which was not denied by the plaintiff in rejoinder. Plaintiff had signed balance-sheet of the companies and was aware of the increase in share capital. Mr Chinoy submits that it is not the case of the plaintiff that he represents other 8/10 th share.

There is neither such pleading nor any prayer in the plaint. It is submitted that in 1976, there was split of four defendants. There is separate residence, separate kitchen and business. Mr Chinoy submits that if there is any independent agreement of any shareholder including the plaintiff in the business arrived between in any of the companies, who were parties to the proceedings, plaintiff would have independent cause of action. Mr Chinoy submits that during the period 2003- 2010, plaintiff got his personal properties given by him in security which are released. Mr Chinoy pointed out that it was not the case of the plaintiff in the pleadings that since 1985, plaintiff and defendant Nos.1 to 8 distributed any profit or had contributed any amount towards any liability of the business of the partnership firm in which they were independent partners and had contributed towards liability of that particular business and were given their respective share as a partner.

Other eight family members have not claimed any share in any of the properties which are subject matter of the suit. It is submitted that onus is on .. 40 .. NMS166.13.sxw the plaintiff to prove nucleous. If family leaves together and worships together, there is general presumption of joint family. It is submitted that independent businesses are never proved otherwise by cogent and clinching evidence. It is submitted that participation in business by labour service, funding and issuing of profit and loss has to be proved. Mr Chinoy, learned senior counsel relied on Judgment of Madras High Court in case of R.

Selvaraj v. R. Radhakrishna reported in AIR 1976 Madras 156 in support of his submission that the contribution of labour, service or money by one member of the joint family to the other should be so conspicuous and impressive that on a prima facie examination of such material, a reasonable and prudent person should gain the impression that the two members were so associated with the common object of exploiting a commercial activity to the advantage of the joint family. It is submitted that there is no presumption that a business conducted by a member of the joint family is a joint family business. The presumption on the other hand has to be contrary. Learned counsel placed reliance on paras 1,2, 6 and 11 of the said judgment which read thus :

1. The unsuccessful plaintiff in O.S. No. 3 of 1968 on the file of the Court of the Subordinate Judge of Nagapattinam, is the appellant. Originally the suit was numbered is O.S. No. 42 of 1967 on the file of the Court of the District Judge, East Thanjavur at Nagapattinam. The suit is one for partition and separate possession of the plaintiff's one-third share in the suit properties and for future .. 41 .. NMS166.13.sxw profits. The plaintiff's case is that his paternal grandfather Rajagopal Pillai started a photo business in 1917 under the name and style of Sri Krishna. Photo Studio. The first defendant is the plaintiff's father and the second defendant is the step-brother of the plaintiff. It is claimed that the first defendant got himself associated with his father in the photo business and both of them ran it as a joint family business. When the grandfather Rajagopal Pillai became old, the first defendant, was in sole charge of the studio and the business and the plaintiff after completing the school course, participated in the same and contributed his labour also. Thus, the family photo business was continued after the death of Rajagopal Pillai in 1965 and considerable properties were acquired from and out of the profits of the business. The plaintiff says that he became an expert in the said business and the grandfather himself till his death was doing the sedentary part of the business. As the joint family had no other business or source of earning except the photo studio, the plaintiff acquired a right by birth in the family activity and the assets secured in exercise of such profession. The family acquired the house in which the studio is at present situate besides agricultural lands of an extent of 6.80 acres in Serukudi village from and out of the business profits. It is claimed that large sums of money have also been deposited by the first defendant in his name in various banks. Soon after the death of the grandfather there were misunderstandings between the plaintiff and the first defendant, who was under the influence of his second wife and by the end of April, 1967 the bickering compelled the plaintiff to demand a division of the joint family properties and allotment of his one-third share to him. The plaintiff also refers to a partition in the family to which he was a party but claims that it is an unstamped and unregistered document and, therefore, would not bind him. As the first defendant refused to effect any proper division of the properties and give his one-third share, though such a demand was made through mediators, he had to file the present action claiming a one-third share in the plaint A to D schedule properties. A schedule properties deal with the materials in the photo studio; B schedule refers to a house in Thiruvarur town. C schedule deals with the agricultural lands and the D schedule refers to a deposit of a sum of Rs. 10,000 made by the first defendant in the Indian Overseas Bank at Thiruvarur.
2. In the first defendant's written statement he admits that .. 42 .. NMS166.13.sxw the plaintiff was living with him till April, 1967. Thereafter the plaintiff was living separately with his wife. It is denied that the photo studio called Sri Krishna Photo Studio is a joint family business and the properties mentioned in the various schedules to the plaint arc joint family properties. Rajagopal Pillai, the grandfather of the plaintiff was a public servant employed as a clerk in the Sub- Registrar's Office in the first instance and later in the railways.