JUDGMENT
"Good name in man and woman, dear my lord, Is the immediate jewel of their souls:

Who steals my purse, steals trash; 'tis something, nothing;

'Twas mine, 'tis his, and has been slave to thousands:
But he that filches from me my good name Robs me of that which not enriches him And makes me poor indeed."1
1. A good name is worth more than good riches was observed by the High Court of Delhi in Ram Jethmalani v. Subramaniam Swamy,2 wherein His Lordship Pradeep Nandrajog, J. (As His Lordship then was), in the concluding paragraph of the judgment quoted the above excerpt from the famous tragic play of the Bard.

2. The doyen of bar, Ram Jethmalani had hauled Subramaniam Swamy to Court to salvage his reputation when Swamy sullied his reputation by making statements and filing written submissions before Justice M.C. Jain Commission of Inquiry constituted under the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952 with regard to the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi, erstwhile Prime Minister of India at Sriperumbudur, Tamil Nadu that Jethmalani had received money from LTTE, a banned 1 Othello (The Tragedy of Othello, the Moor of Venice) - William Shakespeare, Act II, Scene III, p. 167 2 2006 (87) DRJ 603 Page No. 2/107 organisation, whose cadre had been indicted at a criminal trial of conspiring and succeeding in the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi.

3. Dr. Chandra Prakash, IPS (Retd.) the plaintiff before this Court is fighting a dual battle for his honour and life. Dr. Chandra Parkash has knocked the doors of the Court on being aggrieved by a sting operation purported to be conducted by Aniruddha Bahal, wherein Rohtas Singh made defamatory statements and which formed the basis of an article captioned as "Cops gave '84 rioters free hand: Sting, Seniors did not allow Cops to open fire" published in the Times of India, Delhi Edition on 22.04.2014. Dr. Chandra Prakash has sought damages to the tune of ₹15,00,000/- (Rupees Fifteen lakhs only) jointly and severally from the Aniruddha Bahal (defendant No.1), Rohtas Singh (defendant No. 2) and Arindem Sen Gupta, Editor, Times of India (defendant No. 3) 3. Pleadings

4. The case urged by the plaintiff in his plaint is that he retired on superannuation on 30.11.2011, as an officer from the Indian Police Services (IPS) from the cadre of Union Territories now known as Arunachal Pradesh, Goa, Mizoram and Union Territories Cadre).

5. The plaintiff was posted as Deputy Commissioner of Police (DCP) of the South district during the time when the tragic communal riots broke in Delhi in the wake of the assassination of late Prime Minister of India, Smt. Indira Gandhi on 31.10.1984.

3 Arindem Sen Gupta died during the pendency of the legal proceedings and the suit against him was abated - vide order dated 20.05.2016 Page No. 3/107

6. The plaintiff has averred that shortly after the riots, Mr. Ved Marwah, IPS, who was in central deputation at the time of occurrence of the riots was brought to Delhi police by the Congress government by the then Commissioner of police. Mr. Marwah was appointed to head the inquiry committee to enquire into the occurrence of 1984 riots. It is averred by the plaintiff that the whole effort was to protect that the riots were a mere administrative failure without involvement of any political party and political leaders.

7. During the course of inquiry, the plaintiff on 15.02.1985 sent a report as being the DCP, South district, which went against the scheme of things. Thereafter, Mr. Marwah set on a course to destroy the credibility of the plaintiff and started bringing false evidence on record in his inquiry against the plaintiff. It is averred by the plaintiff that a separate defamation suit was filed by him in the year 1995 before the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi and subsequently on enhancement of pecuniary jurisdiction the same was transferred to the district court at Tis Hazari, Delhi. It is averred by the plaintiff that the said suit is at its final stages.

8. As per the averments made in the plaint, the defendant No. 1, namely, Aniruddha Bahal (hereinafter "defendant No. 1") is a journalist, who claims to be engaged in sting operations. The defendant No. 2, namely, Rohtas Singh (hereinafter "defendant No. 2") was the then station house officer (SHO) of police station Delhi Cantonment situated within the South district, which was headed by the plaintiff and the Page No. 4/107 largest number of deaths in the South district occurred in the jurisdiction of the police station headed by defendant No. 2. It is averred by the plaintiff that he as the DCP, South district suspended defendant No. 2 for dereliction of duty pending departmental inquiry against him sometime around mid-November 1984. The defendant No. 3, namely, Arindem Sen Gupta (hereinafter "defendant No. 3") editor of the Times of India, Delhi Edition, who is stated to have published the impugned news article/report dated 22.04.2014.

9. The plaintiff has further averred in the plaint that the defendant Nos. 1 and 2 in collusion made defamatory imputations against him. It is also averred by the plaintiff that the defendant No. 3 did not publish his version despite the plaintiff having requested him by letters dated 08.05.2014 and 27.05.2014. It is also averred by the plaintiff that the legal notice dated 15.05.2014 issued by him to the defendant No. 3 was not paid heed by the defendant No. 3.

10. The plaintiff has averred that the impugned news report/article published in the newspaper Times of India, Delhi Edn. has portrayed him as a police officer, who acted in violation of duty casted on him by law and who failed to maintain law and order. It is also averred by the plaintiff that the allegations made against him in the impugned news article/report depicted him as a police officer who can tamper with official records to suit his personal interest, a conduct unbecoming of a public officer. The plaintiff has further averred that the imputations casted against him are bound to arouse resentment, condemnation and Page No. 5/107 lower the plaintiff's estimation in others. It is averred by the plaintiff that the allegations against him are highly defamatory.

11. The plaintiff has averred in the plaint that the allegations made by defendant No. 2 against him were motivated, malicious, false, baseless and not in good faith. It is further averred by the plaintiff that to his knowledge, the defendant No. 2 prior to 09.05.2011 did not make any allegations against the plaintiff even before any departmental/government authorities, inquiry committees and inquiry commission(s) all the way from Marwah Inquiry Committee appointed in November 1984 to the Nanavati Commission in the year 2000.

12. The plaintiff has averred in the plaint that similar kind of allegations were made against him by one sub-inspector Ramesh Rana, who was posted under defendant No. 2 at the police station Delhi Cantonment during the 1984 riots. It is averred by the plaintiff that during the course of statutory departmental inquiry held against him in the year 1998, after recording of evidence, the credibility of sub- Inspector Rana was rated as nil and the inquiry report was submitted by the commission of inquiries to the Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India, which was the cadre controlling authority as the plaintiff was an Indian police officer under their command and control.

13. The plaintiff has averred that shortly after the riots in the month of November 1984, he suspended sub inspector Ramesh Rana and the defendant No. 2 pending departmental inquiry, as there were reports against them for reporting very less number of killings in the police Page No. 6/107 station Delhi Cantonment under their jurisdiction, through wireless message as compared to the actual number of killings after first day of rioting. It is further averred by the plaintiff that the killings on the later days could have been averted by deploying additional resources had defendant No. 2 not resorted to underreporting of killings.

14. The plaintiff on 28.04.2014 got the legal notice issued to defendant No. 2 calling upon him to deny the false allegations made against the plaintiff and also tender an unqualified public apology through media by 12.05.2014. It is further averred by the plaintiff that in case the defendant No. 2 decides to stick to his guns of the false allegations and fails to produce genuine and cogent evidence in support of his allegations, the plaintiff intends to file civil and criminal proceedings of defamation and other related offences in appropriate court of law at the risk of defendant No. 2. It is averred by the plaintiff that a copy of notice dated 28.04.2014 was also issued to defendant No. 1 for necessary action, as per the notice.

15. The plaintiff has averred that he never received any response from defendant Nos. 1 and 2 to his notice dated 28.04.2014 by 12.05.2014. It is also averred by the plaintiff that meanwhile it came to his notice that defendant No. 1 had also published the false and baseless offending material on the website of Cobrapost. The plaintiff has averred that in view of the allegations interspersed with anchor's indecently abusive and unjustifiably defamatory comments, a supplementary legal notice dated 15.05.2014 was issued to defendant Page No. 7/107 No. 1. It is averred by the plaintiff that in his supplementary legal notice he had stated that the so-called "sting" was carried out and published not to serve any public good but to earn fat money by illegitimate means at the opportune time of General Elections 2014.

16. The plaintiff has averred in the plaint that the defendant No. 1 chose defendant No. 2, who had animus and grudge against the plaintiff. It is further averred by the plaintiff that the defendant No. 2 had an old axe to grind with him and was hellbent to lower the estimation of the plaintiff in the eyes of the public at large and damage his credibility and reputation. It is further averred by the plaintiff that the defendant No. 1 manipulated everything to make the story more sensational and saleable.

17. The plaintiff in paragraph No. 13 of the plaint has averred that it was common knowledge that as far as South district was concerned, the highest number of deaths of victim community, as per the Nanavati Commission report were 341 in the area of police station under the jurisdiction of defendant No. 2. The plaintiff has further averred that according to the Nanavati Commission Report, there was not even a single death in various other police stations situated in South district, such as Nizamuddin, Lodhi Colony, Defence Colony, Sarojini Nagar (earlier known as Vinay Nagar). It is averred by the plaintiff that the allegations levelled by defendant No. 2 are false, as the other police stations within the jurisdiction did not permit law and order situation to slip through hands and saved loss of life and property but it was the police station under the jurisdiction of defendant No. 2 where maximum Page No. 8/107 loss of lives and property occurred. The plaintiff has averred that where on one hand nine police stations other than the police station Delhi Cantonment could contain the loss of life and property, the spread of virus and the blame cannot be casted upon the DCP. It is averred by the plaintiff that the source of mischief, negligence would be the local station house officer of that particular police station i.e. SHO, P.S. Delhi Cantonment, Rohtas Singh. The plaintiff has further averred that it is a mystery that how defendant No. 1 believed the version of defendant No.2 as gospel truth. The plaintiff has averred that if defendant No. 2 had made some incriminating statements against him in unguarded moments during the so-called sting, it could have some significance but it is evident from the statements made by defendant No. 2 that he was simply offering his defence by blaming others.

18. The plaintiff has averred that the sting operation is a collaborative adventure between the defendant No.1 and defendant No. 2 in which both of them stood to gain in their own way, the defendant No.1 by creating a sensational story and defendant No. 2 availing a platform to provide and offer defence.

19. The plaintiff has averred in the plaint that he had been publicly appreciated by the members of the victim community in saving lives, particularly in the area of police station Nizamuddin and the felicitation function held was attended by the plaintiff along with other local police officers after seeking due permission from the departmental authorities. It is also averred by the plaintiff that individual members of the victim Page No. 9/107 community have appreciated his services in saving lives elsewhere in the South district. It is further averred by the plaintiff that the same is a matter of record in the various inquiry reports and in case it becomes necessary, the inquiry report will be proved during the trial of the suit.

20. The plaintiff has averred in the plaint that malice and lack of good faith on the part of defendant No.1 are evident from the fact that during the sting operation, the defendant No.1 took the version of other senior officers but wilfully avoided the plaintiff to take his version of facts, as the same would have demolished the defamatory statements made by his cohort, defendant No. 2. It is averred by the plaintiff that the defendant No. 1 omitted in narration to highlight the statement of the then station house officer of Mehrauli police station, namely, Jaipal Singh, who can be clearly seen and heard stating in the impugned sting video that the plaintiff was deliberately targeted by Mr. Marwah (Marwah Inquiry Committee of November 1984) for extraneous reasons.

21. The plaintiff has averred that the timing of publishing the sting operation in print by the defendant No. 1 as well as electronic media exposes the defendant No. 1 in his purpose and intent which is not to serve any public good but to make maximum money for himself as in the print media i.e. Times of India Article dated 22.04.2014, the statements of SHO level officers are shown recorded in the year 2011 but to lend the sting currency in time, the defendant No. 1 recorded the statements of Gautam Kaul and Subhash Tandon in 2014 at the time of Page No. 10/107 voting for General Elections 2014. It is averred by the plaintiff that the same shows that the defendant No. 1 wanted to bargain form the maximum price with the political parties at the opportune time.

22. The plaintiff has averred in the plaint not only by self-serving, false statements of the defendant No. 2 but also in defendant No. 1's scurrilous anchoring, he falsely projected with malicious intention and not in good faith to make his story sensational that Nanavati Commission had recommended penal action against the plaintiff but the plaintiff escaped action because of the fact of him having retired from the police services. The plaintiff has averred that on study of the Nanavati Commission Report it is disclosed no such recommendation for penal action was made. It is further averred that in fact there was no complaint affidavit against the plaintiff filed before the Nanavati Commission. It is averred by the plaintiff that the Nanavati Commission Report has reiterated the contents of Kusum Lata Mittal Report based on which a departmental inquiry was held against the plaintiff in the year 1988 and after recording of evidence no charge was proved against the plaintiff. The government unjustifiably and in violation of the rules disagreed with the findings of the Inquiry Report of the Commissioner of Inquiries. The plaintiff has averred that he battled against the decision of the government to not accept the departmental inquiry and challenged the same before the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi and an interim order dated 23.09.1998 was passed in favour of the plaintiff.

Page No. 11/107

23. The plaintiff has averred that the matter was sub judice before the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi when he was summoned by the Nanavati Commission. The plaintiff has further averred that for the final decision the matter went up to the Central Administrative Tribunal and it was observed by the Central Administrative Tribunal that the plaintiff has been made a scapegoat and accordingly set aside the adverse order passed by the government with regard to the plaintiff's pension.

24. The plaintiff has averred that all the facts and circumstances averred by him in the plaint revealed the malicious intention, lack of good faith on the part of the defendant Nos. 1 and 2, to scandalise the plaintiff by the so-called sting operation. It is averred by the plaintiff that the defendant No. 1 resorted to such dubious tactics to make his story sensational and more saleable with no concern that it is the plaintiff's reputation which would be a collateral damage. It is averred by the plaintiff that in media one can make a false statement and get away, whereas in judicial proceedings in a court of law making a false statement may land a person in jail. It is further averred by the plaintiff that a notice dated 15.05.2014 was sent by him to the defendant No. 1 to confirm whether any reply to his notice dated 28.04.2014 had been sent by him to the plaintiff. A similar notice was also dispatched to defendant No. 2.

25. With regard to defendant No. 3, the plaintiff has averred that the defendant number three was concerned by publishing the impugned news item, which caused intense damage to the reputation of the Page No. 12/107 plaintiff and even lowered his estimation amongst retired police officers, serving police officers, relatives, friends and known social circles. It is averred by the plaintiff that the defendant No. 3 did not act in good faith and abandoned due care and caution at the peril of plaintiff's reputation. It is further averred by the plaintiff that the defendant No. 3 did not adhere to the professional standards and ethics of journalism, as he did not specify himself about the truth of the statements made against the plaintiff. It is averred by the plaintiff that journalists do not enjoy special privilege in cases of defamation and are at par with ordinary citizens. It is averred by the plaintiff in the plaint that ostensible show off in the news item cannot vouch for the interviews and the same is a subterfuge to collude with the mala fide, evil designs of defendant Nos. 1 and 2.

26. The plaintiff has averred in the plaint that the defendants acted wrongfully, maliciously and dishonestly with reckless disregard for truth and resultant of which the defendants are joint tortfeasors and are jointly and severally liable for damages be it general, special, exemplary and punitive for causing pecuniary and nonpecuniary losses to the plaintiff. It is averred by the plaintiff that he has suffered huge and substantial damage, as he is widely known in the areas of his postings among the retired and serving officers and as a minimalistic estimate, the plaintiff claims ₹15,00,000/- (Rupees Fifteen lakhs only) as damages from the defendants.

27. The plaintiff has averred that the cause of action arose to prefer and maintain the present suit against the defendants arose on 22.04.2014, Page No. 13/107 when the impugned news article/report was published in the newspaper and thereafter subsequent cause of action arose on the dates when the plaintiff issued notice to the defendants. It is averred by the plaintiff that the cause of action arose in Dwarka, New Delhi where the newspaper in question is widely circulated and read. It is also averred by the plaintiff that the cause of action arose in New Delhi as serious injury and damage has been caused to his reputation. Hence, the suit for damages to the tune of ₹15,00,000/- (Rupees Fifteen lakhs only) on account of the plaintiff being defamed by the defendants.

28. The written statement preferred by Aniruddha Bahal (defendant No. 1) has taken the preliminary objection of the suit being barred for misjoinder of parties. The defendant No. 1 has also taken a preliminary objection of no cause of action having arisen in favour of the plaintiff to prefer a suit for damages against the defendant No. 1. The defendant No. 1 has also taken a preliminary objection that the plaint is bereft of any single averment with regard to in whose eyes and for whom the plaintiff has been defamed. The defendant No. 1 has taken a preliminary objection that the plaint preferred by the plaintiff is nothing but false and concocted facts to mislead the Court and to harass the defendant No. 1. The defendant No. 1 has also taken a preliminary objection on the maintainability of the suit for want of jurisdiction.

29. From the perusal of the reply on merits in the written statement, the defence urged by the defendant No. 1 is that of a shield of the justification of truth. It is urged by the defendant No. 1 that the news Page No. 14/107 article was based on information already available in the public domain and which also formed part of Mishra Commission, Kusum Lata Lata Mittal Report, Nanawati Commission Report.

30. The defendant No. 1 in its written statement has declined that he had colluded with the other defendants, particularly, defendant No. 2 and caused any loss and damage to the reputation of the plaintiff. The defendant No. 1 has declined all the allegations made by the plaintiff in his plaint that the sting operation was undertaken by the defendant Nos. 1 and 2 to make maximum money in the year of General Elections. The defendant No. 1 has averred in his defence that Cobrapost is a purely journalistic venture of forum for media and literature, a non-profit non- government organisation advocating free media by generating critical discussion on key social issues. It is also averred by defendant No. 1 in his defence that he absolutely has no commercial interest. In short, the defendant No. 1, has urged in his defence that he never sullied the reputation of the plaintiff and with the plaintiff not being defamed, no case for awarding damages is made out.

31. The written statement preferred by the defendant No. 2 is also on the similar lines of the defendant No. 1 that no disrepute has been caused to the plaintiff. It is urged by the defendant No. 2 that the plaintiff had unfairly and in a biased manner impleaded him on false grounds in an arbitrary and illegal manner in the year 1984. It is averred by the defendant No. 2 in his statement that the plaintiff is nursing an Page No. 15/107 old grudge against the defendant No. 2, which is apparent nay evident from the plaint.

32. The defendant No. 2 has also urged that the suit is not maintainable against him for want of cause of action. It is urged by the defendant No. 2 that he was neither involved in the alleged sting operation carried out by Cobrapost nor in the impugned news article published in the Times of India on 22.0.2014.

33. The defendant No. 2 has denied seeing the original compact disc (CD) of the alleged sting operation but he has averred in his defence that to his knowledge he never gave any interview and spoke to any personal of the Cobrapost alleging imputations against the plaintiff.

34. The defendant No. 2 has admitted in his defence that he was the station house officer of the police station Delhi Cantonment in the year 1984 and the plaintiff was the Deputy Commissioner of Police of South district. The defendant No. 2 has denied any dereliction of duty on his part. It is averred by the defendant No. 2 that the plaintiff was biased towards him on account of the defendant No. 2 being an upright officer for which the plaintiff suspended him temporarily. It is averred by the defendant No. 2 that the plaintiff did not disclose in his plaint that the defendant No. 2 was reinstated with all the benefits and even promoted to the rank of Asstt. Commissioner of Police. The defendant No. 2 has averred in the written statement that the plaintiff has concealed the fact from this Court that the defendant No. 2 was given a clean chit by the Ranganath Misra Commissioner. It is further averred by the defendant Page No. 16/107 No. 2 that the plaintiff had been hellbent to ruin his reputation. In short, the defendant No. 2 has denied having defamed the plaintiff in any manner. The defendant No. 2 has urged that the suit preferred by the plaintiff against him be dismissed as no case of defamation is made out.

35. The written statement preferred on behalf of the defendant No. 3 assails the maintainability of the suit for being a total abuse of process of law.

36. The defendant No. 3 has stated in his defence that the news article published relied upon a sting and the defendant repeatedly emphasised the fact that the sting revealed are only allegations and defendant did not in any way endorse them. It is urged by the defendant No. 3 that he was careful in ensuring that nowhere did it appear that it was either vouching for the authenticity of the sting and the allegations made by those stung, even if the tapes were authentic. The defendant No. 3 has averred in his written statement that he was careful to an extent that he even made it clear in the article that Rohtas Singh (defendant No. 2 herein), the man making the allegations against the plaintiff was himself indicted by an inquiry commission.

37. The defendant No. 3 has urged in his defence that the news article/report was published based on the premise, for the information of his readers in public interest without any illegal or malice against the plaintiff. It is averred by the defendant No. 3 that it is within common knowledge that innocent people of particular community lost their lives and with passage of time there are people, who are still fighting in Page No. 17/107 Courts to get justice. It is urged by the defendant No. 3 that the sting was on matter of public interest and the same was published for the information of the readers as the readers have a right to know, which is a part of freedom of speech of expression indeed a valuable right granted by the Constitution of the country. The defendant No. 3 has averred that the article was published only with the intention to inform its readers about the sting and what has come out in the sting without giving his views or vouching for the authenticity of the sting of statements of the stung.

38. The defendant No. 3 has denied all the allegations made by the plaintiff and taken a stance that no case for defamation is made out in favour of the plaintiff and the question of awarding damages to the tune of ₹15,00,000/- (Rupees Fifteen lakhs only) does not arise.

39. To the written statements filed by the defendants, the plaintiff did file respective replications.

Issues

40. On completion of pleadings, the following issues were framed by the Court vide order dated 15.01.2016:

"1. Whether the News item dt, April 22, 2014 was published in The Times of India by the Defendant No. 3? ... OPP
2. Whether the contents of the sting operation were published on Cobrapost Website by the defendant NOI? ... OPP
3. Whether the contents of News Item mentioned in issue No. 1 are defamatory of the plaintiff? ... OPP Page No. 18/107
4. Whether the contents of sting operation posted on website of Cobrapost are defamatory of the plaintiff?... OPP
5. Whether the statements made by the defendant No. 2 in sting operation in question are defamatory of the plaintiff? ... OPP
6. Whether the plaintiff is entitled for the damages as claimed? ... OPP
7. Relief."
Evidence led by the Parties

8. To prove his case, the plaintiff (PW1) stepped in the witness box along with Dr. Rajneesh Mohan Siwan (PW2), Vikas Yadav (PW3) and Anuj Kumar (PW4). The trial commenced from 08.04.2016 until 25.05.2018.

9. The plaintiff (PW1) tendered his evidence by way of affidavit Ex.PA, and his examination-in-chief was recorded on 08.04.2016. The plaintiff (PW1) relied upon the following documents:

S.No. Exhibit mark put Description and Date, if any of the on the document document 1 Ex.PW1/1 Newspaper dated 22.04.2014 2 Ex.PW1/2 Legal notice dated 28.04.2014 issued to 3 Ex.PW1/3 Legal notice dated 28.04.2014 issued to 4 Ex.PW1/4 Legal notice dated 15.05.2014 issued to 5 Ex.PW1/5 Copy of order dated 23.09.1998 passed by the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi Page No. 19/107 6 Ex.PW1/6 Legal notice to defendant No. 2 dated 15.05.2014 7 Ex.PW1/7 Postal receipts of sending the legal notice to defendant No. 3 dated 08.05.2014 8 Ex.PW1/8 Delivery report 9 Ex.PW1/9 Postal receipt sending the notice dated 10 Ex.PW1/10 Application dated 14.03.2015 placing additional documents on record 11 Ex.PW1/11(Colly.) Postal receipts sending the same to defendant No. 1; reply from postal authorities to RTI application dated 20.08.2014 and clarificatory letter dated 29.09.2014 to defendant No. 1 on 30.04.2014 and 17.05.2014 12 Ex.PW1/12(Colly.) Legal notice dated 29.04.2014 and 13 Ex.PW1/12 Various letters from the postal authority in respect of service of legal notice 14 Ex.PW1/14 CD containing defamatory imputations put 15 Ex.PW1/15 Certificate under Section 65B of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 16 Ex.PW1/16 Reply of defendant No. 1 to the notice served upon him
10. None of the plaintiff' witnesses sans the plaintiff relied upon any documentary evidence. On 25.05.2018, the plaintiff closed his evidence

- vide order dated 25.05.2018.

11. Neither the defendant No. 1 nor defendant No. 2 led any evidence despite opportunities granted to them. The defence evidence of Page No. 20/107 defendant No. 1 was closed vide order dated 16.08.2018 and whereas the defence evidence of defendant No. 2 was close vide order dated 12.07.2018.

Submissions by the Learned Counsel for the Parties

12. Mr. Babu Lal and Mr. Kuljeevan Sidharth, Advocates for the plaintiff and Mr. Shashank Dewan and Mr. Shiv Chopra, Advocates for the defendant No. 1 and Mr. Anujay Tiwari, Advocate for the defendant No. 2 advanced their arguments.

13. Before, I proceed further reiterating the submissions advanced by the learned counsels for the parties, I deem appropriate to note the expanse of the final arguments advanced by the learned counsels for the defendant No. 1.

14. The final arguments were advanced by the learned counsels for the parties at length on 18.12.2019 and matter was reserved for judgment for 17.01.2020. However, post 18.12.2019, an application under Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (hereinafter "CPC") was moved by the defendant No. 1 seeking relief in the nature of permission of the Court to place on record the certified copy of the Nanavati Commission Report inter alia issuance of directions to the plaintiff to give his no objection qua placing of the certified copies of the said report and issuance of summons to the record keeper/concerned person, Ministry of Home Affairs to prove the same.

15. Subsequently, the defendant No. 1 preferred a petition before the High Court of Delhi titled as Aniruddha Bahal v. Dr. Chandra Prakash Page No. 21/107 & Anr. - CM(M) No. 47/2020, wherein order dated 30.01.2020 was passed and directed the parties to appear before the trial Court on 31.01.2020 and address their submissions, if any, in respect of the Nanavati Commission Report. The High Court considering the medical condition of the plaintiff herein requested the trial Court to dispose of the matter expeditiously, if possible, within a period of 15 days from 30.01.2020.

16. Thereafter, on 31.01.2020, Mr. Shiv Chopra, learned counsel for the defendant No. 1 supplemented the arguments already advanced by Mr. Shashank Dewan, Advocate on 18.12.2019. Mr. Babu Lal, learned counsel for the plaintiff once again rejoined his arguments on 31.01.2020. The arguments advanced by the learned counsels for the parties on 18.12.2019 and 31.01.2020 are captured in the following paragraphs.

17. Mr. Babu Lal, learned counsel for the plaintiff submitted that the plaintiff has preferred a suit for recovery of damages of ₹15,00,000/- (Rupees Fifteen lakhs only) on account of defamation. The learned counsel submitted that the plaintiff has been defamed in the eyes of public at large. The learned counsel further submitted that to prove his case not only the plaintiff but also Dr. Rajesh Mohan Siwan, Vikas Yadav and Anuj Kumar stepped into the witness box.

18. The learned counsel for the plaintiff further submitted that the defamatory material was published on Cobrapost by defendant No. 1 and also by the Times of India. The learned counsel further submitted Page No. 22/107 that the defendant No. 2 made defamatory statements against the plaintiff.

19. Mr. Babu Lal, learned counsel for the plaintiff submitted that in the year 1984 the plaintiff was a deputy commissioner of police (DCP) of south district, Delhi and the defendant No. 2 at that point in time was the station house officer (SHO) of police station Delhi Cantonment. The learned counsel further submitted that it is the defendant No. 1 who conducted a sting operation and wherein the statements of defendant No. 2 that it was the plaintiff who passed orders to not allow the defendant No. 2 to open fire. The learned counsel for plaintiff further submitted that the defendant No. 2 during the sting operation stated that the wireless messages were logged in the logbook and it was the plaintiff who tampered with the logbook and changed the messages in the logbook to suit himself.

20. With regard to the defendant No. 3, the learned counsel for plaintiff submitted that the defendant No. 3 was the editor of Times of India on the relevant date of 22.04.2014 i.e. date of publication of the impugned news article/report.

21. The learned counsel for the plaintiff submitted that the impugned news article/report published in Times of India on 22.04.2014 (Ex.PW1/1) has been placed on record. The learned counsel for the plaintiff further submitted that the impugned video published by the defendant No. 1 on Cobrapost has also been filed by the plaintiff in a Page No. 23/107 compact disc (CD)-(Ex.PW1/14) along with a certificate under Section 65B of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.

22. Mr. Babu Lal, learned counsel for the plaintiff submitted that the plaintiff's case is admitted by the defendants. The learned counsel for the plaintiff further submitted that it is not disputed by the parties that the plaintiff was an IPS officer and DCP, South, Delhi. The learned counsel further submitted that the fact of Aniruddh Bahl being the editor of Cobrapost is admitted. The publication of impugned article in the Times of India on the basis of the publication of impugned video of the sting operation by Cobrapost is also admitted.

23. The learned counsel for plaintiff submitted that the defence of investigative journalism does not come to the rescue of the defendant No. 1. The learned counsel for the submitted that the defendant No. 1 did not personally conduct the investigation with regard to the impugned news report.

24. The learned counsel for plaintiff further submitted that the defence of truth and the privilege of being a journalist and the information was shared by the defendant No. 1 in public interest is hollow and an afterthought.