S.NAGAMUTHU.J., Selvi. Sujatha, the detenue, is aged 17 years. She is the daughter of the petitioner. Previously, she was studying in a Higher Secondary School at Tiruvallur and was staying at the house of the petitioner's sister. On 08.06.2011 at about 4.30 p.m. She had gone to a local temple, but she did not return thereafter. The petitioner learnt that the 2nd respondent along with others had kidnapped her. He preferred a complaint in this regard before the 1st respondent on 20.06.2011 on which a case in Crime No.309 of 2011 for offence under Section 366(A) of IPC has been registered. Alleging that the minor detenue was kept illegally by the kidnappers, the petitioner filed the present habeas corpus petition.

2. The 3rd respondent is the father of the 2nd respondent. When this habeas corpus petition came up for hearing before a Division Bench, on 28.07.2011, the Division Bench ordered notice to the respondents. In pursuance of the same, the minor detenue appeared before the Division Bench on 01.08.2011 and filed an affidavit to the effect that she had fallen in love with the 2nd respondent for quite some time and that on knowing the same, her parents started arranging for her marriage with her maternal uncle much against her wish. Therefore, according to her, on 08.06.2011, she left the parental home on her own accord and on 12.07.2011, she married the 2nd respondent. The said marriage has been accepted by the 2nd respondent and his other family members and she is not illegally detained by anybody, she had stated.

3. Based on the above affidavit of the minor detenue, the learned counsel appearing for the respondents 2 and 3 contended before the Division Bench that since the detenue was in a position to make intelligent preference to go with the 2nd respondent and since after the said marriage, the 2nd respondent is the legal guardian, the detenue should be set at liberty to go along with the 2nd respondent.

4. But, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner opposed the same on several grounds projecting the welfare of the minor detenue. Having considered the rival submissions, the Division Bench presided over by Mr.Justice C.Nagappan directed the minor detenue to be kept in a Government Children's Home. The learned counsel heavily placed reliance on the judgment of another Division Bench of this Court in G.Saravanan v. The Commissioner of Police, Trichy City and others , 2011 - 2 - L.W. (Crl.) 114 wherein the Division Bench has held that a child marriage is neither void nor voidable and the same is valid and so, the husband of the child in marriage is entitled for custody of the child / wife . The Division Bench had doubt about the correctness of the said conclusion. The Division Bench also took note of the judgments in Saraswathi Ammal V. Dhanakoti Ammal, (1924) 47 MLJ 614 [Madras High Court], Seema Devi @ Simran Kaur v. State of Himachal Pradesh, (1928) 2 Crimes 68 (Himachal Pradesh High Court), Neetu Singh v. The State, (1999) II AD Delhi 37 [Delhi High Court], Ravikumar v. State , 124 (2005) DLT 1 [Delhi High Court], Manish Singh v. State, AIR 2006 DELHI 37 [Delhi High Court], Association for Social Justice and Research v. Union of India, [decided on 13.05.2010 by Delhi High Court], Latori Chamar v. State of Madhya Pradesh, [decided on 10.01.2007 by Madhya Pradesh High Court], Avinash v. State of Karnataka, CDJ 2011 KAR HC 373 [Karnataka High Court] and Jitendar Kumar Sharma v. State [decided on 11.10.2010 by Delhi High Court]. In Association for Social Justice and Research Case cited supra , a Division Bench of Delhi High Court observed that the issue relating to custody of a minor girl who has been married has been referred to a Full Bench for decision in Lajja Devi's case. We are informed that the said reference has not been so far decided by a larger Bench of the Delhi High Court. But, without noticing the same, a Division Bench of the Delhi High Court in Jitendar Kumar Sharma v. State and another reported in 2010 INDLAW DEL 1904, allowed the minor girl to go with the husband. In this background the Division Bench presided over by Mr.Justice C.Nagappan has referred this matter for answering the following questions:-

(1) Whether a marriage contracted by a person with a female of less than 18 years could be said to be valid marriage and the custody of the said girl be given to the husband [if he is not in custody]?

(2) Whether a minor can be said to have reached the age of discretion and thereby walk away from the lawful guardianship of her parents and refuse to go in their custody?

(3) If yes, can she be kept in the protective custody of the State?

(4) Whether in view of the provisions of Juvenile Justice [Care and Protection of Children] Act, 2000, a minor girl, who claims to have solemnized her marriage with another person would not be a juvenile in conflict with law and whether in violation of the procedure mandated by the Juvenile Justice [Care and Protection of Children] Act, 2000, the Court dealing with a Writ of Habeas Corpus , has the power to entrust the custody of the minor girl to a person, who contracted the marriage with the minor girl and thereby committed an office punishable under Section 18 of the Hindu Marriage Act and Section 9 of the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006 ? and (5) Whether the principles of Sections 17 and 19(a) of the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890, could be imported to a case arising out of the alleged marriage of a minor girl, admittedly in contravention of the provisions of the Hindu Marriage Act?

Having considered the above, the Hon'ble The Chief Justice has constituted this Full Bench and that is how, the matter is before us.

5. When this matter came up for hearing before this Bench on 19.08.2011, the respondents 2 and 3 in the HCP filed a miscellaneous petition in M.P.No.1 of 2011 seeking an interim order to take the detenue to P.B. College of Engineering, Irrungattukottai, for admission in B.Tch course. Accordingly, this court passed an interim order and permitted her to be taken to PB College of Engineering for admission. The minor detenue was thus admitted in the College. The detenue was also produced before this Court. On enquiries, she informed the court that she was not willing to go with her parents and she was ready to attend the college from the college hostel. Having considered the submissions made and having regard to the interest of the minor detenue, this court directed the minor detenue to be kept in the Government Kellys Home for Children, Chennai and to allow her to go to the college every day, however, with the help of a women police constable. Accordingly, she was attending the college.

6. Again on 07.09.2011 when the matter was listed , the learned counsel appearing for the respondents 2 and 3 submitted that the detenue found it very difficult to stay in Government Home for Children, Kellys, Chennai as she was facing lot of difficulties. Thus, she wanted the detenue to be allowed to stay in the hostel of the college. Mr.P.N.Prakash, learned counsel representing P.B. College of Engineering submitted that the college management was having an apprehension to allow her to stay in the hostel in view of certain untoward incidents taken place at the time of remitting the fees in the college. Ms.Geetha Ramaseshan the learned counsel appearing for a Non-Governmental Organization known as "TULIR" a voluntary organisation came forward to keep the detenue in the home known as "Mariyala" situated at Pidariyar Koil Street, George Town, Chennai. In the larger interest of the detenue and on considering the submissions made by the learned counsel on either side, the detenue was ordered to be accommodated in the said home namely Mariyala until further orders and the detenue was permitted to attend the college from there. The Assistant Commissioner of Police was directed to nominate a woman police constable to accompany the detenue to the college everyday in order to ensure her safety. Accordingly, now she is staying in the home.

7. In this background, this habeas corpus petition was heard at length. Mr.R.John Sathyan , learned counsel for the petitioner, Mrs.Sudha Ramalingam, learned counsel for the respondents 2 and 3 and Mr.M.Maharaja, learned Additional Public Prosecutor advanced elaborate arguments. Taking note of the importance of the questions referred to this Full Bench , we requested Mr.P.N.Prakash , the learned counsel to assist this court as Amicus Curiae and accordingly, he rendered assistance.

8. Since the parties to the marriage in this case are admittedly Hindus, we confine our discussion in the context of the laws applicable to Hindus alone. Now let us commence our task to answer the questions under reference.

9. To trace the history of the child marriages, we have to state that until the introduction of the "Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929" child marriages were prevalent in India among Hindus in abundance and there was no mechanism even to discourage the same. Such marriages were all recognized as valid. But, the ill-effects of the child marriage was taken note of even during the colonial period which prompted the law being brought into force to restrain the child marriages by enacting the "Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929". A reference to the said Act would go to show that the said Act, was enacted to carry forward the reformists movement of prohibiting child marriages. While it made a marriage in contravention of the provisions of the Act punishable, simultaneously it did not render the marriage void. It needs to be emphasized that voidness of marriages is statutorily provided and the same is not to be readily inferred. Thus even after the advent of the Child Marriage Restraint Act such marriages were recognized as valid marriages.

10. Subsequently, the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 came into being with effect from 18.05.1955. Section 4 of the said Act states that save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, any other law in force immediately before the commencement of this Act shall cease to have effect in so far as it is inconsistent with any of the provisions contained in this Act. But, no inconsistency could be noticed between the provisions of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 and that of the Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929. Both the Acts coexist.

11. Section 5 of the Hindu Marriage Act, as it was originally brought into force , contained six clauses as follows:-

A marriage may be solemnized between any two Hindus, if the following conditions are fulfilled, namely :

(i) neither party has a spouse living at the time of the marriage;

(ii) at the time of the marriage, neither party

(a) is incapable of giving a valid consent to it in consequence of unsoundness of mind; or

(b) though capable of giving a valid consent, has been suffering from mental disorder of such a kind or to such an extent as to be unfit for marriage and the procreation of children; or

(c) has been subject to recurrent attacks of insanity;

(iii) the bridegroom has completed the age of [twenty-one years] and the bride the age of [eighteen years] at the time of the marriage;

[emphasis supplied]

(iv) the parties are not within the degrees of prohibited relationship, unless the custom or usage governing each of them permits of a marriage between the two;

(v) the parties are not sapindas of each other, unless the custom or usage governing each of them permits of a marriage between the two.

(vi) Where the bride has not completed the age of eighteen years, the consent of the guardian in the marriage if any has been obtained for the marriage. [The sub clause (vi) was repealed by the Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1978 w.e.f. 01.10.1978]

12. The effect of violation of the conditions enumerated in Section 5 of the Hindu Marriage Act are dealt with in Sections 11 and 12 of the Act. According to Section 11 , any marriage solemnized after the commencement of the Act shall be null and void and may, on a petition presented by either party thereto, against the other party, be so declared by a decree of nullity if it contravenes any one or more of the conditions specified in clauses (i), (iv) and (v) of section 5.

13. Similarly, Section 12 of the Hindu Marriage Act speaks of a voidable marriage which reads as follows:-

(1) Any marriage solemnized, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, shall be voidable and may be annulled by a decree of nullity on any of the following grounds, namely :

(a) that the marriage has not been consummated owing to the impotence of the respondent; or

(b) that the marriage is in contravention of the condition specified in clause (ii) of Section 5; or

(c) that the consent of the petitioner, or where the consent of the guardian in marriage of the petitioner [was required under Section 5 as it stood immediately before the commencement of the Child Marriage Restraint (Amendment) Act, 1978 (2 of 1978)] the consent of such guardian was obtained by force [or by fraud as to the nature of the ceremony or as to any material fact or circumstance concerning the respondent]; or

(d) that the respondent was at the time of the marriage pregnant by some person other than the petitioner.

(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), no petition for annulling a marriage

(a) on the ground specified in clause (c) of sub-section (1), shall be entertained if

(i) the petition presented more than one year after the force had ceased to operate or, as the case may be, the fraud had been discovered; or

(ii) the petitioner has, with his or her full consent, lived with the other party to the marriage as husband or wife after the force had ceased to operate or, as the case may be, the fraud had been discovered;

(b) on the ground specified in clause (d) of sub-section (1) shall be entertained unless the court is satisfied

(i) that the petitioner was at the time of the marriage ignorant of the facts alleged;

(ii) that proceedings have been instituted in the case of a marriage solemnized before the commencement of this Act within one year of such commencement and in the case of marriages solemnized after such commencement within one year from the date of the marriage; and

(iii) that marital intercourse with the consent of the petitioner has not taken place since the discovery by the petitioner of the existence of [the said ground]"

14. A close reading of these two provisions would go to show that a marriage solemnized in violation of sub section (iii) of Section 5 of the Hindu Marriage Act has not been declared either as void or voidable. The marriage which falls within the ambit of Section 11 has been held to be void from its very inception [vide Yamunabai Anantrao Adhav Vs. Anantrao Shivram Adhav, A.I.R. 1988 S.C. 644]. So far as a voidable marriage as provided in Section 12 of the Act is concerned , the said marriage may be annulled by a decree of nullity on any one or more of the grounds enumerated thereunder. Since the Hindu Marriage Act as well as the Child Marriage Restraint Act do not declare a marriage of a minor either as void or voidable, such a child marriage was treated all along as valid . There were number of judicial pronouncements to this effect. In this legal scenario, The Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act also provided that the husband of a minor wife is her natural guardian.

15. While so, it was felt that the Child Marriage Restraint Act, did not achieve the desired result. Despite the punishment provided for child marriages, and despite making the punishment more stringent, the menace of child marriage could not be completely eradicated. There were demands from various quarters for making an effective law for this purpose. The Law Commission also recommended for such a law. Responding to the same, at last, with effect from 10.01.2007, "The Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006" was brought into force thereby repealing The Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929. As envisaged in Section 1 of the said Act, it extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir; and it applies also to all citizens of India; provided that nothing contained in this Act shall apply to the Renoncants of the Union territory of Pondicherry. It is manifestly clear that this Act is secular in nature which has crossed all barriers of personal laws. Thus, irrespective of the personal laws, under this Act, child marriages are prohibited.

16. The term "child" has been defined in Section 2 (a) of the said Act which states that "child" means a person who, if a male, has not completed twenty-one years of age, and if a female, has not completed eighteen years of age. This provision is in pari materia with sub section (iii) of section 5 of the Hindu Marriage Act. One of the important and salient features of the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006 is that Section 3 of the Act declares that every child marriage, whether solemnized before or after the commencement of the said Act shall be voidable at the option of the contracting party who was a child at the time of the marriage; provided that petition for annulling the child marriage by a decree of nullity may be filed in the District Court only by the contracting party to the marriage who was a child at the time of the marriage. Section 3 of the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act reads as follows:-

"3. Child marriages to be voidable at the option of contracting party being a child:- (1) Every child marriage, whether solemnised before or after the commencement of this Act, shall be voidable at the option of the contracting party who was a child at the time of the marriage :

Provided that a petition for annulling a child marriage by a decree of nullity may be filed in the district court only by a contracting party to the marriage who was a child at the time of the marriage.

(2) If at the time of filing a petition, the petitioner is a minor, the petition may be filed through his or her guardian or next friend along with the Child Marriage Prohibition Officer.

(3) The petition under this section may be filed at any time but before the child filing the petition completes two years of attaining majority.

(4) While granting a decree of nullity under this section, the district court shall make an order directing both the parties to the marriage and their parents or their guardians to return to the other party, his or her parents or guardian, as the case may be, the money, valuables, ornaments and other gifts received on the occasion of the marriage by them from the other side, or an amount equal to the value of such valuables, ornaments, other gifts and money :

Provided that no order under this section shall be passed unless the concerned parties have been given notices to appear before the district court and show cause why such order should not be passed."

17. This is a great departure made by this Act from the Hindu Marriage Act. When the Prohibition of the Child Marriage Act , 2006 was enacted, the parliament was aware of the provisions of Sections 5, 11, 12 and 18 of the Hindu Marriage Act. By declaring that the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act shall apply to all citizens , the parliament has intended to allow the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act to override the provisions of the Hindu Marriage Act to the extent of inconsistencies between these two enactments. This is manifest from the statement of Objects and Reasons of the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006 which read as follows:-

" The Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929 was enacted with a view to restraining solemnisation of child marriages. The Act was subsequently amended in 1949 and 1978 in order, inter alia, to raise the age limit of the male and female persons for the purpose of marriage. The Act, though restrains solemnisation of child marriages yet it does not declare them to be void or invalid. The solemnisation of child marriages is punishable under the Act.

2. There has been a growing demand for making the provisions of Act more effective and the punishment thereunder more stringent so as to eradicate or effectively prevent the evil practice of solemnisation of child marriages in the country. This will enhance the health of children and the status of women. The National Commission for women in its Annual Report for the year 1995-96 recommended that the Government should appoint Child Marriage Prevention Officers immediately. It further recommend that (i) the punishment provided under the Act should be made more stringent; (ii) marriages performed in contravention of the Act should be made void; and (iii) the offences under the Act should be made congnizable.

3. The National Human Rights Commission undertook a comprehensive review of the existing Act and made recommendations for comprehensive amendments therein vide its Annual Report 2001-2002. The Central Government, after consulting the State Governments and Union Territory Administrations on the recommendations of the National Commission for Women and the National Human Rights Commission, had decided to accept almost all the recommendations and give effect to them by repealing and re-enacting the Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929.

18. A close reading of the above objects and reasons of the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act,would keep things beyond any pale of doubt that the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act is a special enactment for the purpose of effectively preventing the evil practice of solemnisation of child marriages and also to enhance the health of the child and the status of women, whereas , the Hindu Marriage Act is a general law regulating the Hindu marriages. Therefore, the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, being a special law, will have overriding effect over the Hindu Marriage Act to the extent of any inconsistency between these two enactments. In view of the said settled position, undoubtedly, Section 3 of the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act will have overriding effect over the Hindu Marriage Act.

19. But, the Division Bench which decided the case in G.Saravanan v. The Commissioner of Police, Trichy City and others , 2011 - 2 - L.W. (Crl.) 114 held that such a child marriage solemnised between two Hindus is neither void nor voidable, but valid. After having referred to Section 5, 11, 12 and 18 of the Hindu Marriage Act, the Division Bench in Saravanan's case has held as follows:-

"15. A Hindu marriage which is not a void marriage under HMA would continue to be such, provided the provisions of Section 12 of the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006 are not attracted. In the case in hand, none of the circumstances specified in Section 12 arises.

16. Therefore, the marriage between these two is not void or voidable or invalid and it would also be unaffected by the provisions of the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006"

[Emphasis supplied]

20. We find it hard to agree with the above above observation of the Division Bench for, the marriage of a child [minor girl] shall certainly be affected by Section 3 of the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act and thus the said child marriage is voidable. After extracting Section 3 of the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act , the Division Bench, in paragraph 18 & 19 has held as follows:-

"18. The above provision makes it very clear that irrespective of whether the child marriage is voidable or not under Personal Law, makes every child marriage voidable at the option of a party to the marriage, who was a child at the time of marriage. The important aspect of this provision is that a petition for annulling a child marriage by a decree of nullity can be filed only by a party to the marriage, who was a child at the time of marriage. Nobody other than a party to the marriage can petition for annulment of the marriage.

19. In the instant case, the marriage of the detenue with the petitioner is neither void nor voidable nor invalid under both Act, HMA and the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006 as no petition was filed under Section 3 of Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, 2006 by the detenue who is still a minor......"

[Emphasis supplied]

21. From a reading of the above, we infer that probably the Division Bench was of the view that if only a petition is filed under Section 3 of the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act , the said marriage will be voidable. We are unable to agree with the said conclusion arrived at by the Division Bench. In our considered opinion, the marriage shall remain voidable [vide Section 3] and the said marriage shall be subsisting until it is avoided by filing a petition for a decree of nullity by the child within the time prescribed in Section 3 (3) of the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act. If, within two years from the date of attaining eighteen years in the case of a female and twenty-one years in the case of a male, a petition is not filed before the District Court under Section 3 (1) of the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act for annulling the marriage, the marriage shall become a full-fledged valid marriage. Similarly, after attaining eighteen years of age in the case of female, or twenty-one years of age in the case of a male, if she or he elects to accept the marriage, the marriage shall become a full-fledged valid marriage. Until such an event of acceptance of the marriage or lapse of limitation period as provided in Section 12 (3) occurs, the marriage shall continue to remain as a voidable marriage. If the marriage is annulled as per Section 3 (1) of the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, the same shall take effect from the date of marriage and, in such an event, in the eye of law there shall be no marriage at all between the parties at any point of time.

22. As per Section 11 of the Hindu Marriage Act, any marriage solemnized in violation of Clause (i) (iv) and (v) of section 5 of the Hindu Marriage Act is void and the same may be declared by a decree of nullity, whereas under Section 12 of the Hindu Marriage Act, a voidable marriage may be annulled by a decree of nullity. The different expressions used in these two provisions cannot go unnoticed. So far as Section 11 of the Hindu Marriage Act is concerned, the marriage is not annulled and is only declared as void by a decree of nullity. Thus, what is done by the court is only a declaration and not annulment of marriage. But, under Section 12 of the Hindu Marriage Act, since the marriage is not void ab initio, the same requires to be annulled by a decree of nullity. Here, it is not declaration but a positive act of annulment of the marriage by a decree of nullity. Similarly, under Section 3 of the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act also, the court annuls the marriage by a decree of nullity. Thus, Section 12 (1) of the Hindu Marriage Act and Section 3(1) of the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act are in pari materia. Therefore, unless there is a positive decree passed by the competent court annulling the child marriage, the marriage shall be subsisting.

23. At this juncture, we may usefully refer to Mulla on principles of Hindu Law [14th Edition]. While discussing about voidable marriages he has observed as follows:-

"The scheme of the Act is to treat the marriage as valid, void and voidable. Attention has been drawn for the interlocutory note to the distinction between a marriage void ipso jure and a marriage which is voidable at the instance of one of the parties to the same. A voidable marriage remains valid and binding and continues to subsist for all purposes, unless a decree is passed by the court annulling the same on any of the grounds mentioned in the Section. The grounds it will be noticed involve the elements of incapacity of either spouse to consummate the marriage, want of mental capacity of the spouses, absence of free consent of the parties or of a guardian in marriage in case of a bride who had not completed the age of eighteen years at the time of marriage and suppressio veri by a woman, who was pregnant at the time of marriage."

24. Hindu Law on marriages classifies the marriages into three categories namely, valid marriage, void marriage and voidable marriage. Though it is observed in Mulla that a voidable marriage remains valid and binding and continues to subsist for all purposes, unless a decree is passed by the competent court annulling the same, surely, we believe , he has not meant that a voidable marriage is a valid marriage in its stricto sensu as the expression denotes. Here, the term "valid" denotes the converse of the term "invalid". In other words, a voidable marriage is not invalid. But, at the same time, it cannot be construed stricto sensu that it is a valid marriage as per the classification referred to above. In our considered opinion , so far as the victim of the voidable marriage at whose option the marriage can be annulled is concerned, all rights emanating from a valid marriage will enure in favour of her / him. But, so far as the other spouse is concerned, the said marriage shall confer only limited rights upon him/her. But at the same time, it would impose all legal liabilities upon him/her towards the other spouse who is the victim of the voidable marriage. For example, if a minor girl is married to a boy aged more than 21 years, as per the Prohibition of Child Marriage Act, undoubtedly, the marriage is a child marriage and, therefore, the same is voidable. From out of the said voidable marriage, the minor girl will acquire all the rights against the male contracting party which are otherwise available to a wife of a valid marriage. But, the male contracting party who has contracted the minor's marriage will not acquire all the rights which would otherwise emanate from a valid marriage as against the wife except certain limited rights. However, it will impose all liabilities upon the male contracting party such as liability to maintain the victim of the child marriage, liability to provide shelter and liability to afford protection , etc. For instance, if the female child contracting the marriage declines to live in the matrimonial home and prefers to live elsewhere either with parents or with somebody else , the male contracting party will not have right to obtain a decree under Section 9 of the Hindu Marriage Act for restitution of conjugal rights. Similarly, until the female [child] attains the age of 18 years, the male cannot file a petition for divorce on any ground. If the marriage is construed to be valid stricto sensu as per the classification referred to above such rights under Sections 9 and 13 of the Hindu Marriage Act will very much be available to the male. Because the marriage remains to be voidable and the same is not valid stricto sensu, though out of the said marriage the male [major] burdens himself with liabilities towards his minor wife [child], he does not acquire all the rights against his wife like any husband of a valid marriage. This is the basic difference between a valid marriage stricto sensu and a voidable marriage. Therefore, the observation by Mulla that a voidable marriage remains valid and binding and continues to subsist shall not be understood that the marriage is a valid marriage stricto sensu as per the classification referred to above. In other words, a voidable marriage will not fall within the classification of valid marriages. The expression 'valid' used therein is a lose language and not in its strict legal sense.